THE MODERN LIBRARY 

OF THE W O R L D* S BEST BOOKS 


SELECTED SHORT STORIES 
OF FRANZ KAFKA 


The publishers mil he pleased to send, upon request, an 
illustrated folder setting forth the purpose and scope of 
THE MODERN LIBR ARY, and listing each volume 
in the senes. Every reader of hooks will find titles he 
has been looking for, handsomely* printed, in definitive 
editions, and at an unusually* low price. 







SELECTED 


short stories 

O F 

franz kafka 

TRANSLATED BY WUla and Edmn Muir 
INTRODUCTION BY Philip Rahi? 


THE M0HEHN B H ABT * N E W TOH H 






Copyright, 1936, 1937, by Htinr Mercy Sohn, Prague 
Copyright, 1946, 194S, by Schocken Boohi, Inc 
Copy'Tight, 1952, by Random House, Ine, 


Library of Congress Catalog Card jXumber- 52’-9771 


Random House is the publisher op The Modern Library 


BENNETT A. CERF • DONALD S KLOPFER • ROBERT K. HAAS 
Manufactured in the United States of America 
By H. Wolff 



Contents 


PAGE 

Introduction by Philip Rahv vii 

The Judgment 3 

The Metamorphosis 19 

In the Penal Colony 90 

The Great Wall of China 1^9 

A Country Doctor 148 

A Common Confusion 157 

The New Advocate 159 

An Old Manuscript 161 

A Fratricide 165 

A Report to an Academy 168 

The Hunter Gracchus 181 

A Hunger Artist 188 

Investigations of a Dog 202 

The Burrow 256 

Josephine the Singer, or the Mouse Folk 305 




Introduction 


BY PHILIP RAHV 


Though the work of Franz Kafka has but lately been 
made available to readers, his name is today firmly 
linked in the literary mind to such names as Joyce and 
Proust and Yeats and Rilke and Eliot — the ‘'sacred un- 
touchables,” as they have been rightly called, of the mod- 
ern creative line. Among them he is exceptional in that 
he enjoyed no public recognition of consequence during 
his lifetime, for he withheld his longer narratives from 
publication and was scarcely known beyond a narrow 
circle of German writers. His posthumous world-fame 
came to him only in the past two decades. 

The first translation of one of his books appeared in 
this country in 1930, six years after his death. That book 
was The Castle , a novel that ranks high in the Kafka 
canon. Few readers were then able to gauge its true 
worth, and even as late as 1937, when The Trial was 
brought out here, it was chiefly Kafka's apparent mys- 
tifications rather than his pattern of meaning and basic 
motives that aroused interest. Readers were astonished 
by him but hardly convinced of his importance. Since 
then his idiosyncratic but powerful sensibility has en- 

vii 



INTRODUCTION 


viii 

tered into the bloodstream of twentieth-century litera- 
ture. He has been made the subject of numerous critical 
studies in many languages; and everywhere the more 
sensitive younger writers, conscious of the static condi- 
tion of the prevailing fictional techniques and seeking a 
creative renewal through mythic and symbolic concep- 
tions, have taken his example to heart. There can be 
little doubt any longer of his stature as an artist in the 
metaphysical mode, whose concern is with the ultimate 
structure of human existence, or of his surpassing origi- 
nality as an innovator in creative method. Like Rilke 
in the Duino Elegies he asked the supreme question: 
Was war wirklich im All? (“What was real in the 
world?”). 

A master of narrative tone, of a subtle, judicious and 
ironically conservative style, Kafka combines within one 
framework the recognizable and mysterious, extreme 
subjectivity of content with forms rigorously objective, 
a lovingly exact portrayal of the factual world with a 
dreamlike and magical dissolution of it. By unifying 
those contrary elements he was able to achieve no less 
than a new mutation in the art of prose fiction. This 
much can be said, I think, without attempting to give 
an integrated critical estimate of his work, which at this 
time may well be premature. The analysis and descrip- 
tion of some of its qualities will suffice. Thus it is clear 
that if Kafka so compellingly arouses in us a sense of 
immediate relatedness, of strong even if uneasy identifi- 
cation, it is because of the profound quality of his feel- 
ing fox the experience of human loss, estrangement, 



INTRODUCTION iH 

guilt and anxiety — ^an experience increasingly dominant 
in the modern age. 

That Kafka is among the most neurotic of literary 
artists goes without saying. It accounts, mainly, for the 
felt menace of his fantastic symbolism and for his drastic 
departure from the well-defined norms of the literary 
imagination. For all its obviousness, however, the fact 
of Kafka’s neuroticism presents a danger, if not a vulgar 
temptation, to the unliterary mind, which tends to con- 
fuse a fact so patent with critical judgment and ap- 
praisal. No greater error is possible in our approach to 
literary art. To avoid that common error it is above all 
necessary to perceive that Kafka is something more than 
a neurotic artist; he is also an artist of neurosis, that is 
to say, he succeeds in objectifying through imaginative 
means the states of mind typical of neurosis and hence 
in incorporating his private world into the public world 
we all live in. Once that is accomplished, the creative 
writer has performed the essential operation which is 
the secret of his triumph as an artist, if not as a man; 
he has exorcised his demon, freed himself of his personal 
burden, converting us into his accomplices. And we, as 
good readers, as willing accomplices, have no real reason 
to complain. Neurosis may be the occasion, but litera- 
ture is the consequence. Moreover, the creative writer 
is the last person we may look to if our concern is with 
drawing a line between the normal and the abnormal. 
For whatever the practicing psychologist may make of 
that crude though useful distinction, the artist cannot 
attend to it without inhibiting his sense of life in its 
full concreteness and complexity. 



X 


INTRODUCTION 


The novelist Graham Greene has remarked that “every 
creative writer worth our consideration, every writer 
who can be called in the wide use of the term a poet, is 
a victim: a man given over to an obsession/' Kafka's 
obsession was an inordinate sense of inadequacy, fail- 
ure and sinfulness — a sinfulness corresponding to noth- 
ing he had actually done or left undone, but lodged 
in the innermost recesses of his being. “The state in 
which we find ourselves is sinful, quite independently 
of guilt,” he wrote in his notebook. The clue to The 
Trial is in the reflection that “only our concept of time 
makes it possible for us to speak of the Day of Judgment 
by that name; in reality it is a summary court in per- 
petual session.” And in the same sequence of reflection 
we find the perfectly typical sentence: “The hunting 
dogs are playing in the courtyard, but the hare will not 
escape them, no matter how fast it may be flying already 
through the woods.” The identification here is plainly 
with the hare; and with the hunting dogs, too, insofar 
as they represent the hare's longing for self-punishment, 
his inner wish to be cornered, to be hurt, to be torn to 
pieces so as to atone for the guilt that fills him from top 
to bottom. In this one short sentence about the hare 
and the hunting dogs you have the gist of the typical 
Kafkan narrative, the obsessive theme, the nuclear fable 
concerning the victim of an unappeasable power to 
which he returns again and again, varying and compli- 
cating its structure with astonishing resourcefulness, and 
erecting on so slender a foundation such marvelous 
superstructures as that of the myth of the Old Com- 
mander in In the Penal Colony^ the myth of the Law in 



INTRODUCTION xi 

The Trial and o£ the celestial bureaucracy in The 
Castle. 

The simplicity of the nuclear fable in Kafka should 
not lead us, however, to disregard the qualities that make 
him one of the most enigmatic figures in world litera- 
ture. It does no good to speak of him as an author of 
religious allegories. Unlike such religious allegorists as 
Dante or Bunyan he does not depend on the definitive 
logic of a generally known system of theology; his crea- 
tive mode presupposes no body of knowledge external 
to itself; he is not allegorical in any accepted sense but 
rather an innovator so deeply individualistic as to fit 
none of the familiar categories. Also, the difiiculty of 
understanding him is on a different plane from that 
encountered in reading a novelist like James Joyce, for 
example. Whereas the obscurities of the latter are in- 
herent in the elaborate stylization of his material and 
in his complex structural designs, in Kafka’s case it is 
the meaning alone that baffles us. Both in language and 
construction he is elementary compared to Joyce, yet 
many readers have been mystified by his fictions. But 
the mystification is gradually cleared up once we learn 
to listen attentively to his tone and become accustomed 
to the complete freedom with which he suspends cer- 
tain conventions of storytelling when it suits his sym- 
bolic purpose. Thus when we read in the first sentence 
of The Metamorphosis that the clerk Gregor Samsa 
awoke one morning to find himself changed into a gi- 
gantic insect, it is a mistake to think that by means of 
this bold stroke Kafka intends to call into question the 
laws of nature. What he calls into question, rather, is 



Xii INTRODUCTION 

the convention that the laws of nature are at all times 
to be observed in fiction; and having suspended that 
convention in the very first paragraph of the story, from 
that point on he develops it in a logical and realistic 
manner. The clerk’s metamorphosis is a multiple symbol 
of his alienation from the human state, of his ‘"awaken- 
ing” to the full horror of his dull, spiritless existence, 
and of the desperate self-disgust of his unconscious fan- 
tasy-life, in which the wish to displace the father and 
take over his authority in the family is annulled by the 
guilt-need to suffer a revolting punishment for his pre- 
sumption. 

Another type of symbolism, far less psychologically 
charged, is found in stories like The Great Wall of 
China, What is the Great Wall? It is likewise a multiple 
symbol — of human solidarity, of earthly fulfillment and 
of mankind’s effort to obtain supernatural guidance. 
But why was the wall built in a piecemeal fashion, 
thus permitting the nomads of the North to slip through 
the gaps? The reply is that it is in the nature of man 
to achieve only limited ends. He cannot comprehend 
the Whole; his vision is discontinuous, his security al- 
ways incomplete; his aims he can realize only in frag- 
mentary fashion. No doubt the “high command” is 
ultimately responsible for the apparently inexpedient 
method of the wall’s construction, yet it would never 
do to question its decrees. Not that such questioning is 
blasphemous in itself, but rather that in the long run 
it is useless. Logic can bring us up only to a certain 
point. Beyond that an answer of a sort is given by the 
beautiful parable of the river in spring. And as the story 



INTRODUCTION 


xiii 


continues the theme of the wall is dialectically con- 
verted into a series of poetic speculations concerning 
the relationship between the Chinese and the imperial 
court at Pekin, that is between God and man. While 
in Investigations of a Dog the remoteness of God is 
represented as a remoteness in time, in this story the 
imagery is chiefly spatial. Pekin is so far away from the 
villagers of the South that they can hardly imagine its 
existence. They worship dynasties long since dead; news 
arriving from the imperial court is obsolete by the time 
it reaches them. This inability of the ‘‘Chinese’’ to pos- 
sess their Emperor in his vital contemporaneity appears 
to be a reflection on the idea of God as known to mod- 
ern man — an idea ill-defined, nebulous and, above all, 
archaic. Man is now unaware of the real powers that 
govern his life; insofar as he has any knowledge of 
divinity it is as of something purely historical. 

The quarrel between the religious and the psycho- 
analytic interpreters of Kafka is of no great moment, 
as his work is sufficiently meaningful to support some 
of the “truths” of both schools. Thus the father who 
condemns his son to death by drowning (in The Judg- 
ment) can be understood as the tyrannical father of 
Freudian lore and at the same time as the God of Judg- 
ment rising in His wrath to destroy man’s illusion of 
self-sufficiency in the world. At bottom there is no con- 
flict between the two interpretations. For one thing, 
they are not really mutually exclusive; for another, the 
reading we give the story depends as much on our own 
outlook — within certain limits, of course — ^as on that of 
the author. There was in Kafka’s character an element 



XIV 


INTRODUCTION 


of radical humility not permitting him to set out to 
“prove’' any given attitude toward life or idea about it. 
This he plainly tells us in some of the aphorisms that 
he wrote about himself in the third person: “He proves 
nothing but himself, his sole proof is himself, all his 
opponents overcome him at once, not by refuting him 
(he is irrefutable) but by proving themselves.’’ 

That Kafka was a man of religious temper I have 
no doubt. Though the creator of a surpassing imagery 
of human failure and frustration, inclined to feel im- 
prisoned on this earth, afflicted with “the melancholy, 
the impotence, the sicknesses, the feverish fancies of the 
captive,” he never abandons his trust in the spirituality 
of existence, in the “indestructible,” and is disheartened 
by his literary effort because he wants his writing to 
attain the power of lifting the world into the realm of 
“the pure, the true, the immutable.” Yet there is noth- 
ing either in his private papers or in his fiction to war- 
rant the claim that he was a believer in a personal God 
who gave his assent to any of the dogmatic systems 
associated with institutional religion. Even original sin, 
the dogma closest to the thematic center of his work, 
he interprets speculatively as “consisting of the com- 
plaint, which man makes and never ceases making, that 
a wrong had been done to him, that the original sin 
was committed upon him.” From the standpoint of the 
theologian that is sheer heresy, gentle, self -incriminating 
heresy, to be sure, but heresy nevertheless. The Ger- 
man critic Franz Blei, who was personally acquainted 
with Kafka, speaks of him as “the servant of a God not 
believed in.” A piety so paradoxical, so immune to cate- 



INTRODUCTION 


XV 


goricai definition, so removed from the fixed and tradi- 
tional, refusing the consolation of revealed religion yet 
intent on winning through to ‘‘a faith like a guillotine, 
as heavy, as light,’’ could never have found expression 
in general ideas or logical thought but only in the 
language of art, the one language capable of offering 
everything while claiming nothing, asserting nothing, 
proving nothing. 

Born in Prague in 1883 of middle-class Jewish par- 
ents, Kafka appears to have lost his self-confidence early 
in life, exchanging for it, as he himself put it, ‘‘a 
boundless sense of guilt.” Moods of loss and failure, 
and the idea of the insolubility even of the most ordi- 
nary human problems, depressed his youth and later 
inspired his art. Because of this unceasing distrust in 
himself he tended to regard with astonishment and 
inordinate admiration all examples of constructive will, 
of the ability of men to discover their true calling and 
achieve that integration in the community to which he 
attached the highest value but which he believed to be 
beyond his own reach. His constant plaint was the same 
as that of that character in Hawthorne’s story. The In- 
telligence Office^ who never ceases to cry out: *1 want 
my place, my own place, my proper sphere, my thing 
to do, which nature intended me to perform when she 
fashioned me thus awry, and which I have vainly sought 
all my lifetime!” 

In the center of Kafka’s life stands the father, a figure 
fully corresponding to that Freudian terror, the Primal 
Sire. Energetic, overbearing, capricious, successful, re- 
spectable, the father, not so much by malicious inten 



XVI 


INTRODUCTION 


tion as by being simply what he was, exposed to ridicule 
his son's impractical inclinations and spiritual wander- 
ings. The mother, though solicitous for her son, '^vas 
far too much absorbed in her husband to play an inde- 
pendent role; and young Franz was thus driven to ex- 
tremes of loneliness and introspection that continually 
negated themselves in the idea of integration througli 
marriage, children and the practice of an honorable pro- 
fession ('‘a true calling . . . the right vocation”). The 
effect on him of his father was such that though he 
usually talked exceedingly well, in the presence of the 
formidable parent he took to stuttering. ‘Tor me,” he 
wrote to his father in later life, ''you began to have that 
mysterious quality which all tyrants have, whose privi- 
lege is based on their personality, not on reason.” It is 
clear that the source of the principle of authority so 
characteristic of his art is to be traced to his ambivalent 
attitude to his father, an attitude of strong repulsion as 
well as identification. Constructed out of elements of 
his own personality, the protagonist of his major fictions 
is coerced by extranatural powers who are continually 
justified and exalted even as they are made to manifest 
themselves in the guise of a menacing and arbitrary 
bureaucracy. Max Brod, Kafka's lifelong friend, biog- 
rapher and editor of his posthumous writings, relates 
that in many talks he attempted to demonstrate to him 
the foolishness of his self-contempt and chronic over- 
estimation of his father. These talks were useless, for 
Kafka produced a "torrent of arguments” that shat- 
tered and repelled his friend, who soon realized that 
only from the standpoint of an outsider could it be 



INTRODUCTION 


XVll 


asked: "What difference could his father’s approval 
make to Kafka?” His need for that approval was obvi- 
ously "an innate, irrefutable feeling” that lasted to the 
end of his life. 

In 1906 he took his degree in law at the German 
University in Prague and soon afterwards obtained a 
post in an accident-insurance office. But his real interest 
was in writing, which he approached with the utmost 
moral earnestness, regarding it as a sacred expenditure 
of energy, an effort at communion with one’s fellow- 
men, the reflected splendor of religious perception. 
However, it could never serve as his means of livelihood; 
aside from his objection in principle to turning literary 
talent into a source of material benefits, there were 
other obstacles. He wrote at a pace altogether his own, 
filled with a raging discontent; at the same time there 
was the drastic need to stand on his own feet, to win 
immediate independence from the family. Yet the work 
at the insurance office disintegrated him; the two occu- 
pations were incompatible. 

In his letters he writes of literature as his only hope 
for happiness and fulfillment; and telling of trancelike 
states when he felt himself at the boundary of the hu- 
man, he adds that they lacked the serenity of inspira- 
tion and were not conducive to the best writing. He 
speaks of himself as having been on the way to create 
"a new secret doctrine, a Kabala,” but his replies as 
to the meaning of that doctrine are as diverse as they 
are contradictory. (His precision, Brod rightly says, was 
moral, not intellectual.) "I represent,” we read in his 
diary, "the negative elements of my age . . . Unlike 



X.viii INTRODUCTION 

Kierkegaard, I was not guided in life by the now heavily 
sinking hand of Christianity, nor have I caught hold, 
like the Zionists, of one of the ends of the flying prayer- 
shawl of the Jews.” The one break in his relationship 
with Brod seems to have been caused by his coolness to 
Zionism. “What have I in common with the Jews,” he 
wrote, “when I have scarcely anything in common with 
myself?” In later years, however, he developed a lively 
interest in the aspirations of the Zionists, studied Jew- 
ish folk-literature, the Hebrew language and read the 
Talmud (to which his style, by the way, in its reason- 
ing, argumentative quality, in its movement through 
assertion and contradiction, statement and refutation, 
bears some resemblance). 

It was in 1912 — a fateful year in his life — that he met 
Felice B., the young woman from Berlin whom he 
wanted to marry but was forced to renounce, suffering 
terrible anguish in twice breaking his engagement to 
her. He felt that for a man in his uprooted condition, 
lacking independent status and a secure orientation in 
life, marriage was an impossible task. But that was the 
year, too, in which his literary intentions and continual 
probing of his own predicament came together in a way 
enabling him to forge decisively ahead in his work. 
Compared to what he wrote in the fall of that year 
everything he had written previously seems sketchy and 
unfinished. On the night of September 22nd of that 
seminal fall he wrote The Judgment in one sitting, 
remarking afterwards that during that long stretch 
between ten o’clock in the evening and six o’clock the 



INTRODUCTION 


XDfc 


next morning he more than once carried his weight on 
his own back. The Judgment is the first Kafkan story 
which is all of a piece and the first in which the charac- 
teristic theme of the struggle between father and son 
is sounded to the depths. That same month and the 
next he wrote the long opening chapter of Amerikaj his 
first novel, and in November he completed The Meta- 
morphosisy certainly his greatest story, in which he 
achieves an overpowering effect through his consum- 
mate handling of the factual detail that supports and 
actualizes the somber fantasy of the plot. This story 
is the very embodiment of that quality of the exigent 
and the extreme, that sense of a human being hemmed 
in by his own existence and absolutely committed to it, 
which touches us so deeply in Kafka because it is at once 
method and content, entreaty and response, the goal 
and the way. It is mainly through this “existential** 
quality that Kafka substantiates his world for us, im- 
parting the unmistakable appeal of reality to those ele^ 
ments in it that might otherwise appear to be little 
more than the products of a bizarre or erratic imagina^ 
tion. In The Metamorphosis y I would say, Kafka foi 
the first time fully realized his own innermost concep- 
tion of writing — a conception of inexpressible urgency 
and inwardness. Long before the composition of the 
Story, he attempted to explain what writing meant to 
him when he said in a letter to his friend Oskar Poliak 
that “the books we need are of the kind that act upon 
us like a misfortune, that make us suffer like the death 
of someone we love more than ourselves, that make us 



XX 


INTRODUCTION 


feel as though we were on the verge of suicide, or lost 
in a forest remote from all human habitation — a book 
should serve as the ax for the frozen sea within us.” 

In October of that same year Max Brod notes in his 
diary; “Kafka in ecstasy. Writes all night long. . . 
And again; “Kafka in incredible ecstasy.” There is 
something more to this ecstatic state than elation and 
the sense of freedom a writer normally experiences when 
making visible progress in his work. The patently com- 
pulsive nature of The Judgment and The Metamor- 
phosis , no less than Kafka’s otvn comment upon them 
in his diaries, suggest that these stories served as “the 
ax for the frozen sea” within him — in other words, that 
the process of their creation involved a breakthrough 
to layers of repressed material which had heretofore 
proven inaccessible. It is as if in these psychodynamic 
fictions the neurotic sufferer in Kafka and the artist 
in him locked hands and held on for dear life. Precisely 
of works such as these one can say tvith Yeats that “the 
more unconscious the creation the more powerful." 

The movement of Kafka’s narrative art is from psy- 
chology to experimental mythology, from the immedi- 
ate appropriation of personal states to their projection 
into the world at large. Thus the principle of authority 
in which his work is centered is at the outset, as in The 
Judgment and The Metamorphosis, represented in the 
figure of a “real” father, a father whom it is not very 
difficult to identify in terms of the Freudian “family 
romance,” while in the later and longer works the 
father is no longer recognizable as a figure in the world 
we know. He has been removed from the family circle 



INTRODUCTION 


XXI 


and generalized into an institutional power — ^hierarchic, 
remote, mysterious — such as the Law, the Court and the 
order of officials that resides in the Castle. 

In respect to this line of development In the Penal 
Colony can be regarded as a transitional story. It was 
written in November, 1914, when Kafka had already 
begun working on The Trial. Perhaps because it shows 
the influence of Kierkegaard, upon whom Kafka first 
came in 1913, the religious analogues of this story are 
clearer than in the earlier tales. The Old Commander, 
whose dread memory is invoked in In the Penal Colony, 
retains some of the individual traits of the “real” father, 
at the same time as he is mythicized in the manner of 
the images of authority projected in the later novels. 

But in the long run the early breakthrough in his 
writing to the deeper layers of his psychic life failed to 
free Kafka of his nerve-destroying fears and sense of 
unworthiness. He continued to quarrel with himself, 
plotting self-punishment, thinking even of suicide. 
“Balzac carried a cane on which was carved the legend: 
I smash every obstacle; my legend reads; Every obstacle 
smashes me.” The constant seesaw between writing and 
his job affected his health. He suffered from head- 
aches and insomnia, finally tuberculosis set in and he 
was compelled to spend years in sanitariums. His illness 
he considered to be psychically determined — “My head 
conspired with my lung behind my back.” It was not 
until 1923, when he met Dora Dymant, a girl brought 
up in an orthodox Jewish family in Poland, and he 
found himself well enough to move with her to Berlin, 
that he at long last realized his longing for independ- 



XXii INTRODUCTION 

ence. But, as it turned out, it was already too late to 
obtain the restitution he sought for the lost years of 
ickness and misery. In June, 1924, at the age of forty- 
one, he died in a hospital near Vienna of laryngeal 
tuberculosis. 

During his lifetime he published only some of his 
shorter works, and never quite finished any of his three 
novels. Before his death he wrote to Max Brod request- 
ing him to burn all the manuscripts he was leaving be- 
hind. Fortunately, his friend took upon himself the 
honorable responsibility of disregarding that desperate 
last instruction. 

The stories in this volume are printed in the approxi- 
mate order of their composition. All but The Hunter 
Gracchus^ A Common Confusion^ The Great Wall of 
China, The Burrow and Investigations of a Dog, ap- 
peared during their author’s lifetime; and of the five 
posthumous pieces only A Common Confusion is com- 
plete; the last pages of the other stories are either miss- 
ing or were never written. 

New York 
June, 1952 



SELECTED SHORT STORIES 
OF FRANZ KAFKA 




The Judgment 


It was a Sunday morning in the very height of spring. 
Georg Bendemann, a young merchant, was sitting in 
his own room on the first floor of one of a long row of 
small, ramshackle houses stretching beside the river 
which were scarcely distinguishable from each other 
except in height and coloring. He had just finished 
a letter to an old friend of his who was now living 
abroad, had put it into its envelope in a slow and 
dreamy fashion, and with his elbows propped on the 
writing table was gazing out of the window at the river, 
the bridge and the hills on the farther bank with their 
tender green. 

He was thinking about his friend, who had actually 
run away to Russia some years before, being dissatisfied 
with his prospects at home. Now he was carrying on a 
business in St. Petersburg, which had flourished to be- 
gin with but had long been going downhill, as he always 
complained on his increasingly rare visits. So he was 
wearing himself out to no purpose in a foreign country; 
the unfamiliar full beard he wore did not quite conceal 
the face Georg had known so well since childhood, and 
his skin was growing so yellow as to indicate some latent 

3 



J THE JUDGMENT 

disease. By his own account he had no regular connec- 
tion with the colony of his fellow countrymen out there 
and almost no social intercourse with Russian families, 
so that he was resigning himself to becoming a perma- 
nent bachelor. 

What could one write to such a man, xvho had ob%'i- 
ously run off the rails, a man one could be sorry for but 
could not help? Should one advise him to come home, 
to transplant himself and take up his old friendships 
again — there was nothing to hinder him — and in general 
to rely on the help of his friends? But that was as good as 
telling him, and the more kindly the more offensively, 
that all his efforts hitherto had miscarried, that he 
should finally give up, come back home, and be gaped 
at by everyone as a returned prodigal, that only his 
friends knew what was what and that he himself was 
just a big child who should do what his successful and 
home-keeping friends prescribed. And was it certain, 
besides, that all the pain one would have to inflict on 
him would achieve its object? Perhaps it would not even 
be possible to get him to come home at all — ^he said him- 
self that he was now out of touch with commerce in his 
native country — and then he would still be left an alien 
in a foreign land embittered by his friends’ advice and 
more than ever estranged from them. But if he did fol- 
low their advice and then didn’t fit in at home — not out 
of malice, of course, but through force of circumstances 
— couldn’t get on with his friends or without them, felt 
humiliated, couldn’t be said to have either friends or a 
country of his own any longer, wouldn’t it have been 



THE JUDGMENT 5 

better for him to stay abroad just as he was? Taking all 
this into account, how could one be sure that he would 
make a success of life at home? 

For such reasons, supposing one wanted to keep up 
correspondence with him, one could not send him any 
real news such as could frankly be told to the most dis- 
tant acquaintance. It was more than three years since 
his last visit, and for this he offered the lame excuse that 
the political situation in Russia was too uncertain, which 
apparently would not permit even the briefest absence 
of a small business man while it allowed hundreds of 
thousands of Russians to travel peacefully abroad. But 
during these three years Georg's own position in life 
had changed a lot. Two years ago his mother had died, 
since when he and his father had shared the household 
together, and his fi'iend had of course been informed 
of that and had expressed his sympathy in a letter 
phrased so dryly that the grief caused by such an event, 
one had to conclude, could not be realized in a distant 
country. Since that time, however, Georg had applied 
himself with greater determination to the business as 
well as to everything else. 

Perhaps during his mother's lifetime his father's in- 
sistence on having everything his own way in the busi- 
ness had hindered him from developing any real ac- 
tivity of his own, perhaps since her death his father had 
become less aggressive, although he was still active in 
the business, perhaps it was mostly due to an accidental 
run of good fortune — ^which was very probable indeed 
- — but at any rate during those two years the business 



6 


THE JUDGMENT 

had developed in a most unexpected way, the staff had 
had to be doubled, the turnover ^vas five times as great, 
no doubt about it, further progress lay just ahead. 

But Georg s friend had no inkling of this improve- 
ment. In earlier years, perhaps for the last time in that 
letter of condolence, he had tried to persuade Georg to 
emigrate to Russia and had enlarged upon the prospects 
of success for precisely Geoi'g s branch of trade. Tlie 
figures quoted were microscopic by comparison with 
the range of Georg’s present operations. Yet he shrank 
from letting his friend know about his business success, 
and if he were to do it now retrospectively that certainly 
would look peculiar. 

So Georg confined himself to giving his friend unim- 
portant items of gossip such as rise at random in the 
memory when one is idly thinking things over on a 
quiet Sunday. All he desired was to leave undisturbed 
the idea of the home town which his friend must have 
built up to his own content during the long interval. 
And so it happened to Georg that three times in three 
fairly widely separated letters he had told his friend 
about the engagement of an unimportant man to an 
equally unimportant girl, until indeed, quite contrary 
to his intentions, his friend began to show some in- 
terest in this notable event. 

Yet Georg preferred to write about things like these 
rather than to confess that he himself had got engaged 
a month ago to a Fraulein Frieda Brandenfeld, a girl 
from a well-to-do family. He often discussed this friend 
of his with his fiancee and the peculiar relationship that 
had developed between them in their correspondence. 



■^HE JUDGMENT 7 

‘So he won't be coming to our wedding/’ said she, “and 
yet I have a right to get to know all your friends.” “I 
don’t want to trouble him,” answered Georg. “Don’t 
misunderstand me, he would probably come, at least I 
think so, but he would feel that his hand had been 
forced and he would be hurt, perhaps he would envy me 
and certainly he’d be discontented and without being 
able to do anything about his discontent he’d have to 
go away again alone. Alone — do you know what that 
means?” “Yes, but may he not hear about our wedding 
in some other fashion?” “I can’t prevent that, of course, 
but it’s unlikely, considering the way he lives.” “Since 
your friends are like that, Georg, you shouldn’t ever 
have got engaged at all.” “Well, we’re both to blame for 
that; but I wouldn’t have it any other way now.” And 
when, breathing quickly under his kisses, she still 
brought out: “All the same, I do feel upset,” he thought 
it could not really involve him in trouble were he to 
send the news to his friend. “That’s the kind of man I 
am and he’ll just have to take me as I am,” he said to 
himself, “I can’t cut myself to another pattern that 
might make a more suitable friend for him.” 

And in fact he did inform his friend, in the long 
letter he had been writing that Sunday morning, about 
his engagement, with these words: “I have saved my 
best news to the end. I have got engaged to a Fraulein 
Frieda Brandenfeld, a girl from a well-to-do family, 
who only came to live here a long time after you went 
away, so that you’re hardly likely to know her, Tiiere 
will be time to tell you more about her later, for today 
let me just say that I am very happy and as between you 



8 THE JUDGMENT 

and me the only difference in our relationship is that 
instead of a quite ordinary kind of friend you will now 
have in me a happy friend. Besides that, you will ac- 
quire in my fiancee, who sends her warm greetings and 
will soon write you herself, a genuine friend of the op- 
posite sex, which is not without importance to a bache- 
lor. I know that there are many reasons why you can’t 
come to see us, but would not my wedding be precisely 
the right occasion for giving all obstacles the go-by? Still, 
however that may be, do just as seems good to you with- 
out regarding any interests but your own/’ 

With this letter in his hand Georg had been sitting a 
long time at the writing table, his face turned towards 
the window. He had barely acknowledged, with an ab- 
sent smile, a greeting waved to him from the street by a 
passing acquaintance. 

At last he put the letter in his pocket and went out of 
his room across a small lobby into his father’s room, 
which he had not entered for months. There was in fact 
no need for him to enter it, since he saw his father daily 
at business and they took their midday meal together at 
an eating house; in the evening, it was true, each did as 
he pleased, yet even then, unless Georg — as mostly hap- 
pened — ^went out with friends or, more recently, visited 
his fiancee, they always sat for a while, each with his 
newspaper, in their common sitting room. 

It surprised Georg how dark his father’s room was 
even on this sunny morning. So it was overshadowed as 
much as that by the high wall on the other side of the 
narrow courtyard. His fatlmr was sitting by the window 
in a corner hung with various mementoes of Georg’s 



THE JUDGMENT S 

dead mother, reading a newspaper which he held to one 
side before his eyes in an attempt to overcome a defect 
of vision. On the table stood the remains of his break- 
fast, not much of which seemed to have been eaten. 

“Ah, Georg,” said his father, rising at once to meet 
him. His heavy dressing gown swung open as he walked 
and the skirts of it fluttered round him. — “My father 
is still a giant of a man,” said Georg to himself. 

“It’s unbearably dark here,” he said aloud. 

“Yes, it’s dark enough,” answered his father. 

“And you’ve shut the window, too?” 

“I prefer it like that.” 

“Well, it’s quite warm outside,” said Georg, as if com 
tinuing his previous remark, and sat down. 

His father cleared away the breakfast dishes and set 
them on a chest. 

“I really only wanted to tell you,” went on Georg, 
who had been vacantly following the old man’s move- 
ments, “that I am now sending the news of my engage- 
ment to St. Petersburg.” He drew the letter a little way 
from his pocket and let it drop back again. 

“To St. Petersburg?” asked his father. 

“To my friend there,” said Georg, trying to meet his 
father’s eye. — In business hours he’s quite different, he 
was thinking. How solidly he sits here with his arms 
crossed. 

“Oh, yes. To your friend,” said his father, with pecul- 
iar emphasis. 

“Well, you know. Father, that I wanted not to tell 
him about my engagement at first. Out of consideration 
for him, that was the only reason. You know yourself 



10 


THE JUDGMENT 


he’s a difficult man. I said to myself that someone else 
might tell him about my engagement, altliough he’s such 
a solitary creature that that was hardly likely — I couldn’t 
prevent that — but I wasn’t ever going to tell him my- 
self.” 

'‘And now you’ve changed your mind?” asked his 
father, laying his enormous newspaper on the window 
sill and on top of it his spectacles, which he covered trith 
one hand. 

“Yes, I Ve been thinking it over. If he’s a good friend 
of mine, I said to myself, my being happily engaged 
should make him happy too. And so I wouldn’t put off 
telling him any longer. But before I posted the letter I 
wanted to let you know.” 

“Georg,” said his father, lengthening his toothless 
mouth, “listen to me! You’ve come to me about this 
business, to talk it over with me. No doubt that does 
you honor. But it’s nothing, it’s worse than nothing, if 
you don’t tell me the whole truth. I don’t want to stir 
up matters that shouldn’t be mentioned here. Since the 
death of our dear mother certain things have been done 
that aren’t right. Maybe the time will come for mention- 
ing them, and maybe sooner than we think. There’s 
many a thing in the business I’m not aware of, maybe 
it’s not done behind my back — I’m not going to say that 
it’s done behind my back — I’m not equal to things any 
longer, my memory’s failing, I haven’t an eye for so 
many things any longer. That’s the course of nature in 
the first place, and in the second place the death of our 
dear mother hit me harder than it did you. — But since 
we’re talking about it, about this letter, I beg you, Georg, 



THE JUDGMENT 

don’t deceit' £ me. It’s a trivial affair, it’s hardly worth 
mentioning, so don’t deceive me. Do you really have this 
friend in St. Petersburg?” 

Georg rose in embarrassment. “Never mind my 
friends. A thousand friends wouldn’t make up to me for 
my father. Do you know what I think? You’re not taking 
enough care of yourself. But old age must be taken care 
of. I can’t do without you in the business, you know that 
very well, but if the business is going to undermine 
your health, I’m ready to close it down tomorrow for- 
ever. And that won’t do. ’We’ll have to make a change in 
your way of living. But a radical change. You sit here iir 
the dark, and in the sitting room you would have plenty 
of light. You just take a bite of breakfast instead of prop- 
erly keeping up your strength. You sit by a closed win- 
dow, and the air would be so good for you. No, Father? 
I’ll get the doctor to come, and we’ll follow his orders. 
We’ll change your room, you can move into the front 
room and I’ll move in here. You won’t notice the 
change, all your things will be moved with you. But 
there’s time for all that later. I’ll put you to bed now 
for a little; I’m sure you need to rest. Come, I’ll help 
you to take off your things, you’ll see I can do it. Or if 
you would rather go into the front room at once, you 
can lie down in my bed for the present. That would be 
the most sensible thing.” 

Georg stood close beside his father, who had let hiu 
head with its unkempt white hair sink on his chest. 

“Georg,” said his father in a low voice, without mov- 
ing. 

Georg knelt down at once beside his father. In the 



12 


THE JUDGMENT 

old man’s weary face he saw the pupils, over-large, fix- 
edly looking at him from the corners of the eyes. 

‘‘You have a friend in St. Petersburg. You’ve always 
been a leg-puller and you haven’t even shrunk from 
pulling my leg. How could you have a friend out there! 
I can’t believe it.” 

“Just think back a bit. Father,” said Georg, lifting his 
father from the chair and slipping off his dressing gown 
as he stood feebly enough, “it’ll soon be three years since 
my friend came to see us last. I remember that you used 
not to like him very much. At least twice I kept you 
from seeing him, although he w^as actually sitting with 
me in my room. I could quite well understand your 
dislike of him, my friend has his peculiarities. But then, 
later, you got on with him very well. I was proud be- 
cause you listened to him and nodded and asked him 
questions. If you think back you’re bound to remember. 
He used to tell us the most incredible stories of the 
Russian Revolution. For instance, when he was on a 
business trip to Kiev and ran into a riot, and saw a priest 
on a balcony who cut a broad cross in blood on the palm 
of his hand and held the hand up and appealed to the 
mob. You’ve told that story yourself once or twice 
since.’' 

Meanwhile Georg had succeeded in lowering his 
father down again and carefully taking off the woollen 
drawers he wore over his linen underpants and his socks. 
The not particularly clean appearance of this under- 
wear made him reproach himself for having been neg- 
lectful. It should have certainly been his duty to see 



THE JUDGMENT 1 $ 

that his father had clean changes of underwear. He had 
not yet explicitly discussed with his bride-to-be what 
arrangements should be made for his father in the 
future, for they had both of them silently taken it 
for granted that the old man would go on living alone 
in the old house. But now he made a quick, firm deci- 
sion to take him into his own future establishment. It 
almost looked, on closer inspection, as if the care he 
meant to lavish there on his father might come too late. 

He carried his father to bed in his arms. It gave him 
a dreadful feeling to notice that while he took the few 
steps towards the bed the old man on his breast was 
playing with his watch chain. He could not lay him 
down on the bed for a moment, so firmly did he hang 
on to the watch chain. 

But as soon as he was laid in bed, all seemed well. He 
covered himself up and even drew the blankets farther 
than usual over his shoulders. He looked up at Georg 
with a not unfriendly eye. 

'‘You begin to remember my friend, don’t you?” asked 
Georg, giving him an encouraging nod. 

“Am I well covered up now?” asked his father, as if 
he were not able to see whether his feet were properly 
tucked in or not. 

“So you find it snug in bed already,” said Georg, and 
tucked the blankets more closely round him. 

“Am I well covered up?” asked the father once more, 
seeming to be strangely intent upon the answer. 

“Don’t worry, you’re well covered up.” 

“No!” cried his father, cutting short the answer, threw 



14 the judgment 

the blankets off with a strength that sent them all flying 
in a moment and sprang erect in bed. Only one hand 
lightly touched the ceiling to steady him. 

“You wanted to cover me up, I know, my young sprig, 
but I’m far from being covered up yet. And even if this 
is the last strength I have, it’s enough for you, too much 
for you. Of course I know your friend. He would have 
been a son after my own heart. That’s tvhy you’ve been 
playii.g him false all these years. Why else? Do you think 
I haven’t been sorry for him? And that’s why you had to 
lock yourself up in your office — the Chief is busy, mustn’t 
be disturbed — ^just so that you could write your lying 
little letters to Russia. But thank goodness a father 
doesn’t need to be taught how to see through his son. 
And now that you thought you’d got him down, so far 
down that you could set your bottom on him and sit on 
him and he wouldn’t move, then my fine son makes up 
his mind to get married!’’ 

Georg stared at the bogey conjured up by his father. 
His friend in St. Petersburg, whom his father suddenly 
knew too well, touched his imagination as never be- 
fore. Lost in the vastness of Russia he saw him. At the 
door of an empty, plundered warehouse he satv him. 
Among the wreckage of his showcases, the slashed rem- 
nants of his wares, the falling gas brackets, he was just 
standing up. Why did he have to go so far away! 

“But attend to me!’’ cried his father, and Georg, al- 
most distracted, ran towards the bed to take everything 
in, yet came to a stop halfway. 

“Because she lifted up her skirts,” his father began to 
flute, “because she lifted her skirts like this, the nasty 



THE JUDGMENT 

creature,” and mimicking her he lifted his shirt so high 
that one could see the scar on his thigh from his war 
wound, “because she lifted her skirts like this and this 
you made up to her, and in order to make free with her 
undisturbed you have disgraced your mother's memory, 
betrayed your friend and stuck your father into bed so 
that he can't move. But he can move, or can't he?” 

And he stood up quite unsupported and kicked his 
legs out. His insight made him radiant. 

Georg shrank into a corner, as far away from his 
father as possible. A long time ago he had firmly made 
up his mind to watch closely every least movement so 
that he should not be surprised by any indirect attack, 
a pounce from behind or above. At this moment he re- 
called this long-forgotten resolve and forgot it again, 
like a man drawing a short thread through the eye of a 
needle. 

“But your friend hasn’t been betrayed after alll” cried 
his father, emphasizing the point with stabs of his fore- 
finger. “I’ve been representing him here on the spot.” 

“You comedian!” Georg could not resist the retort, 
realized at once the harm done and, his eyes starting in 
his head, bit his tongue back, only too late, till the pain 
made his knees give. 

“Yes, of course I’ve been playing a comedy! A com- 
edy! That’s a good expression! What other comfort was 
left to a poor old widower? Tell me — and while you’re 
answering me be you still my living son — what else was 
left to me, in my back room, plagued by a disloyal staff, 
old to the marrow of my bones? And my son strut- 
ting through the world, finishing off deals that I had 



l6 THE JUDGMENT 

prepared for him, bursting with triumphant glee and 
stalking away from his father with the closed face of a 
respectable business man! Do you think I didn’t love 
you, I, from whom you ai'e sprung?” 

Now he’ll lean forward, thought Georg. What if he 
topples and smashes himself! These words went hissing 
through his mind. 

His father leaned forward but did not topple. Since 
Georg did not come any nearer, as he had expected, he 
straightened himself again. 

“Stay where you are, I don’t need you! You think you 
have strength enough to come over here and that you’re 
only hanging back of your own accord. Don’t be too 
sure! I am still much the stronger of us two. All by my- 
self I might have had to give way, but your mother has 
given me so much of her strength that I’ve established a 
fine connection with your friend and I have your cus- 
tomers here in my pocket!” 

“He has pockets even in his shirt!” said Georg to him- 
self, and believed that with this remark he could make 
him an impossible figure for all the world. Only for a 
moment did he think so, since he kept on forgetting 
everything. 

“Just take your bride on your arm and try getting in 
my way! I’ll sweep her from your very side, you don’t 
know how!” 

Georg made a grimace of disbelief. His father only 
nodded, confirming the truth of his words, towards 
Georg’s corner. 

“How you amused me today, coming to ask me if you 
should tell your friend about your engagement. He 



THE JUDGMENT 17 

knows it already, you stupid boy, he knows it alll IVe 
been writing to him, for you forgot to take my writing 
things away from me. That’s why he hasn’t been here 
for years, he knows everything a hundred times better 
than you do yourself, in his left hand he crumples your 
letters unopened while in his right hand he holds up my 
letters to read through!” 

In his enthusiasm he waved his arm over his head. 
“He knows everything a thousand times better!” he 
cried. 

“Ten thousand times!” said Georg, to make fun of 
his father, but in his very mouth the words turned into 
deadly earnest. 

“For years I’ve been waiting for you to come with 
some such question! Do you think I concern myself 
with anything else? Do you think I read my newspapers? 
Look!” and he threw Georg a newspaper sheet which he 
had somehow taken to bed with him. An old newspa- 
per, with a name entirely unknown to Georg. 

“How long a time you’ve taken to grow up! Your 
mother had to die, she couldn’t see the happy day, your 
friend is going to pieces in Russia, even three years ago 
he was yellow enough to be thrown away, and as for me, 
you see what condition I’m in. You have eyes in your 
head for that!” 

“So you’ve been lying in wait for me!” cried Georg. 

His father said pityingly, in an offhand manner; “I 
suppose you wanted to say that sooner. But now it 
doesn’t matter.” And in a louder voice: “So now you 
know what else there was in the world besides yourself, 
til] now you’ve known only about yourself! An innocent 



x8 


IHE JUDGMENT 

child, yes, that you were, truly, but still more truly 
have you been a devilish human being! — ^And therefore 
take note: I sentence you now to death by drowning!” 

Georg felt himself urged from the room. The crash 
with which his father fell on the bed behind him was 
still in his ears as he fled. On the staircase, which he 
rushed down as if its steps were an inclined plane, he 
ran into his charwoman on her way up to do the morn- 
ing cleaning of the room. “Jesus!” she cried, and cov- 
ered her face wuth her apron, but he was already gone. 
Out of the front door he rushed, across the roadway, 
driven towards the water. Already he was grasping at 
the railings as a starving man clutches food. He swung 
himself over, like the distinguished gymnast he had 
once been in his youth, to his parents’ pride. With 
weakening grip he w^as still holding on when he spied 
between the railings a motor-bus coming which would 
easily cover the noise of his fall, called in a low voice: 
'‘Dear parents, I have always loved you, all the same,” 
and let himself drop. 

At this moment an unending stream of traffic was 
rust going over the bridge. 



The Metamorphosis 


1 

As Gregor Samsa awoke one morning from uneasy 
dreams he found himself transformed in his bed into a 
gigantic insect. He was lying on his hard, as it were 
armor-plated, back and when he lifted his head a little 
he could see his dome-like brown belly divided into stiff 
arched segments on top of which the bed quilt could 
hardly keep in position and was about to slide off com- 
pletely, His numerous legs, which were pitifully thin 
compared to the rest of his bulk, waved helplessly before 
his eyes. 

What has happened to me? he thought. It was no 
dream. His room, a regular human bedroom, only 
rather too small, lay quiet between the four familiar 
walls. Above the table on which a collection of cloth 
samples was unpacked and spread out — Samsa was a 
commercial traveler — hung the picture which he had 
recently cut out of an illustrated magazine and put into 
a pretty gilt frame. It showed a lady, with a fur cap on 
and a fur stole, sitting upright and holding out to the 
spectator a huge fur muff into which the whole of her 
forearm had vanished! 

19 



20 


THE METAMORPHOSIS 


Gregor’s eyes turned next to the window, and the 
overcast sky — one could hear rain drops beating on the 
window gutter — made him quite melancholy. What 
about sleeping a little longer and forgetting all this 
^aonsense, he thought, but it could not be done, for he 
Was accustomed to sleep on his right side and in his 
present condition he could not turn himself over. How- 
ever violently he forced himself towards his right side 
he always rolled on to his back again. He tried it at least 
a hundred times, shutting his eyes to keep from seeing 
his struggling legs, and only desisted when he began to 
feel in his side a faint dull ache he had never experi- 
enced before. 

Oh God, he thought, what an exhausting job IVe 
picked on! Traveling about day in, day out. It’s much 
more irritating work than doing the actual business in 
the office, and on top of that there’s the trouble of con- 
stant traveling, of worrying about train connections, 
the bed and irregular meals, casual acquaintances that 
are always new and never become intimate friends. The 
devil take it all! He felt a slight itching up on his belly; 
slowly pushed himself on his back nearer to the top of 
the bed so that he could lift his head more easily; identi- 
fied the itching place which was surrounded by many 
small while spots the nature of which he could not un- 
derstand and made to touch it with a leg, but drew 
the leg back immediately, for the contact made a cold 
shiver run through him. 

He slid down again into his former position. This 
getting up early, he thought, makes one quite stupid, 
A man needs his sleep* Other commercials live like 



THE METAMORPHOSIS 


21 


harem women. For instance, when I come back to the 
hotel of a morning to write up the orders IVe got, these 
others are only sitting down to breakfast. Let me just 
try that with my chief; Fd be sacked on the spot. Any- 
how, that might be quite a good thing for me, who can 
tell? If I didn’t have to hold my hand because of my 
parents I’d have given notice long ago, I’d have gone to 
the chief and told him exactly what I think of him. That 
would knock him endways from his desk! It’s a queer 
way of doing, too, this sitting on high at a desk and talk- 
ing down to employees, especially when they have tc 
come quite near because the chief is hard of hearing* 
Well, there’s still hope; once I’ve saved enough money 
to pay back my parents’ debts to him — that should take 
another five or six years — I’ll do it without fail. I’ll cur 
myself completely loose then. For the moment, though, 
I’d better get up, since my train goes at five. 

He looked at the alarm clock ticking on the chest. 
Heavenly Father! he thought. It was half-past six o’clock 
and the hands were quietly moving on, it was even 
past the half-hour, it was getting on toward a quarter 
to seven. Had the alarm clock not gone off? From the 
bed one could see that it had been properly set for four 
o’clock; of course it must have gone off. Yes, but was 
it possible to sleep quietly through that ear-splitting 
noise? Well, he had not slept quietly, yet apparently 
all the more soundly for that. But what was he to do 
now? The next train went at seven o’clock; to catch 
that he would need to hurry like mad and his samples 
weren’t even packed up, and he himself wasn’t feeling 
particularly fresh and active. And even if he did catch 



SS THE METAMORPHOSIS 

the train he wouldn’t avoid a row with the chief, since 
the firm’s porter would have been waiting for the five 
o’clock train and would have long since reported his 
failure to turn up. The porter was a creature of the 
chief’s, spineless and stupid. Well, supposing he were to 
say he was sick? But that would be most unpleasant and 
would look suspicious, since during his five years’ em- 
ployment he had not been ill once. The chief himself 
would be sure to come with the sick-insurance doctor, 
would reproach his parents with their son’s laziness 
and would cut all excuses short by refen'ing to the in- 
surance doctor, who of course regarded all mankind as 
perfectly healthy malingerers- And would he be so far 
wrong on this occasion? Gregor really felt quite well, 
apart from a drowsiness that was utterly superfluous 
after such a long sleep, and he was even unusually hun- 
gry- 

As all this was running through his mind at top 
speed without his being able to decide to leave his bed 
-—the alarm clock had just struck a quarter to seven — 
there came a cautious tap at the door behind the head 
of his bed. “Gregor,” said a voice — it was his mother’s 
— “it’s a quarter to seven. Hadn’t you a train to catch?” 
That gentle voice! Gregor had a shock as he heard his 
own voice answering hers, unmistakably his own voice, 
it was true, but with a persistent horrible twittering 
squeak behind it like an undertone, that left the words 
in their clear shape only for the first moment and then 
rose up reverberating . round them to destroy their 
sense, so that one could not be sure one had heard them 
rightly. Gregor wanted to answer at length and explain 



THE METAMORPHOSIS 


23 

ev^ei7thing, but in the circumstances he confined him- 
self to saying: “Yes, yes, thank you. Mother, I’m getting 
up now.” The wooden door between them must have 
kept the change in his voice from being noticeable out- 
side, for his mother contented herself with this state- 
ment and shufHed away. Yet this brief exchange of 
words had made the other members of the family aware 
that Gregor was still in the house, as they had not ex- 
pected, and at one of the side doors his father was al- 
ready knocking, gently, yet with his fist. “Gregor, 
Gregor,” he called, “what*s the matter with you?” And 
after a little while he called again in a deeper voice: 
“Gregor! Gregor!” At the other side door his sister was 
saying in a low, plaintive tone: “Gregor? Aren’t you 
well? Are you needing anything?” He answered them 
both at once: “I’m just ready,” and did his best to 
make his voice sound as normal as possible by enunciat- 
ing the words very clearly and leaving long pauses be- 
tween them. So his father went back to his breakfast, 
but his sister whispered: “Gregor, open the door, do.” 
However, he was not thinking of opening the door, and 
felt thankful for the prudent habit he had acquired in 
traveling of locking all doors during the night, even 
at home. 

His immediate intention was to get up quietly with- 
out being disturbed, to put on his clothes and above all 
eat his breakfast, and only then to consider what else 
was to be done, since in bed, he was well aware, his 
meditations would come to no sensible conclusion. He 
remembered that often enough in bed he had felt small 
aches and pains, probably caused by awkward postures. 



§4 the metamorphosis 

which had proved purely imaginary once he got up, and 
he looked forward eagerly to seeing this morning’s de- 
lusions gradually fall away. That the change in his voice 
^\^as nothing but the precursor of a severe chill, a stand- 
ing ailment of commercial travelers, he had not the 
least possible doubt. 

To get rid of the quilt was quite easy; he had only to 
inflate himself a little and it fell off by itself. But the 
next move was difficult, especially because he was so 
uncommonly broad. He would have needed arms and 
hands to hoist himself up; instead he had only the nu- 
merous little legs which never stopped waving in all di- 
rections and which he could not control in the least. 
When he tried to bend one of them it was the first to 
stretch itself straight; and did he succeed at last in mak- 
ing it do what he wanted, all the other legs meanwhile 
waved the more wildly in a high degree of unpleasant 
agitation. '‘But what’s the use of lying idle in bed,” said 
Gregor to himself. 

He thought that he might get out of bed with the 
lower part of his body first, but this lower part, which 
he had not yet seen and of which he could form no clear 
conception, proved too difficult to move; it shifted so 
slowly; and when finally, almost wild with annoyance, 
he gathered his forces together and thrust out recklessly, 
he had miscalculated the direction and bumped heavily 
against the lower end of the bed, and the stinging pain 
he felt informed him that precisely this lower part of 
his body was at the moment probably the most sensitive. 

So he tried to get the top part of himself out first, and 
cautiously moved his head towards the edge of the bed. 



THE METAMORPHOSIS 25 

That proved easy enough, and despite its breadth and 
mass the bulk of his body at last slowly followed the 
movement of his head. Still, when he finally got his head 
free over the edge of the bed he felt too scared to go on 
advancing, for after all if he let himself fall in this way 
it would take a miracle to keep his head from being 
injured. And at all costs he must not lose consciousness 
now, precisely now; he would rather stay in bed. 

But when after a repetition of the same efforts he lay 
in his former position again, sighing, and watched his 
little legs struggling against each other more wildly 
than ever, if that were possible, and saw no way of bring- 
ing any order into this arbitrary confusion, he told him- 
self again that it was impossible to stay in bed and that 
the most sensible course was to risk everything for the 
smallest hope of getting away from it. At the same 
time he did not forget meanwhile to remind himself 
that cool reflection, the coolest possible, was much bet- 
ter than desperate resolves. In such moments he focused 
his eyes as sharply as possible on the window, but, un- 
fortunately, the prospect of the morning fog, which 
muffled even the other side of the narrow street, 
brought him little encouragement and comfort. ‘‘Seven 
o'clock already,” he said to himself when the alarm 
clock chimed again, “seven o’clock already and still 
such a thick fog.” And for a little while he lay quiet, 
breathing lightly, as if perhaps expecting such com- 
plete repose to restore all things to their real and nor- 
mal condition. 

But then he said to himself: “Before it strikes a 
quarter past seven I must be quite out of this bed, with^ 



26 THE METAMORPHOSIS 

out fail. Anyhow, by that time someone will have come 
from the office to ask for me, since it opens before 
seven.” And he set himself to rocking his whole body at 
once in a regular rhythm, with the idea of swinging it 
out of the bed. If he tipped himself out in that way he 
could keep his head from injury by lifting it at an acute 
angle when he fell. His back seemed to be hard and was 
not likely to suffer from a fall on the carpet. His biggest 
worry was the loud crash he would not be able to help 
making, which w^ould probably cause anxiety, if not 
terror, behind all the doors. Still, he must take the risk. 

When he was already half out of the bed — the new 
method was more a game than an effort, for he 
needed only to hitch himself across by rocking to and 
fro — it struck him how simple it would be if he could 
get help. Two strong people — he thought of his father 
and the servant girl — ^^vould be amply sufficient; they 
would only have to thrust their arms under his convex 
back, lever him out of the bed, bend down with their 
burden and then be patient enough to let him turn 
himself right over on to the floor, where it was to be 
hoped his legs would then find their proper function. 
Well, ignoring the fact that the doors were all locked, 
ought he really to call for help? In spite of his misery 
he could not suppress a smile at the very idea of it. 

He had got so far that he could barely keep his equi- 
librium when he rocked himself strongly, and he would 
have to nerve himself very soon for the final decision 
since in five minutes’ time it would be a quarter past 
seven — ^when the front doorbell rang. “That’s someone 
from the office,” he said to himself, and grew almost 



THE METAMORPHOSIS 27 

rigid, while his little legs only jigged about all the faster* 
For a moment everything stayed quiet. '‘They're not 
going to open the door,” said Gregor to himself, catch- 
ing at some kind of irrational hope. But then of course 
the servant girl went as usual to the door with her heavy 
tread and opened it. Gregor needed only to hear the 
first good morning of the visitor to know immediately 
who it was — the chief clerk himself. What a fate, to be 
condemned to work for a firm where the smallest omis- 
sion at once gave rise to the gravest suspicion! Were 
all employees in a body nothing but scoundrels, was 
there not among them one single loyal devoted man 
who, had he wasted only an hour or so of the firm’s time 
in a morning, was so tormented by conscience as to be 
driven out of his mind and actually incapable of leaving 
his bed? Wouldn’t it really have been sufficient to send 
an apprentice to inquire — if any inquiry were necessary 
at all — did the chief clerk himself have to come and thus 
indicate to the entire family, an innocent family, that 
this suspicious circumstance could be investigated by 
no one less versed in affairs than himself? And more 
through the agitation caused by these reflections than 
through any act of will Gregor swung himself out of bed 
with all his strength. There was a loud thump, but it 
was not really a crash. His fall was broken to some ex- 
tent by the carpet, his back, too, was less stiff than he 
thought, and so there was merely a dull thud, not so 
very startling. Only he had not lifted his head carefully 
enough and had hit it; he turned it and rubbed it on the 
carpet in pain and irritation. 

“That was something falling down in there,” said the 



28 THE METAMORPHOSIS 

chief clerk in the next room to the left. Gregor tried to 
suppose to himself that something like what had hap- 
pened to him today might some day happen to the 
chief clerk; one really could not deny that it was possi- 
ble. But as if in brusque reply to this supposition the 
chief clerk took a couple of firm steps in the next-door 
room and his patent-leather boots creaked. From the 
right-hand room his sister was whispering to inform 
him of the situation: “Gregor, the chief clerk’s here.” 
“I know,” muttered Gregor to himself; but he didn’t 
dare to make his voice loud enough for his sister to 
hear it. 

“Gregor,” said his father now from the left-hand 
room, “the chief clerk has come and wants to know why 
you didn’t catch the early train. We don't know what to 
say to him. Besides, he wants to talk to you in person. 
So open the door, please. He will be good enough to 
excuse the untidiness of your room.” “Good morning, 
Mr. Samsa,” the chief clerk was calling amiably mean- 
while. “He’s not well,” said his mother to the visitor, 
while his father was still speaking through the door, 
“he’s not well, sir, believe me. What else would make 
him miss a train! The boy thinks about nothing but 
his work. It makes me almost cross the way he never 
goes out in the evenings; he’s been here the last eight 
days and has stayed at home every single evening. He 
just sits there quietly at the table reading a newspaper 
or looking through railway timetables. The only amuse- 
ment he gets is doing fretwork. For instance, he spent 
two or three evenings cutting out a little picture frame: 
you would be surprised to see how pretty it is; it’s hang- 



THE METAMORPHOSIS 


29 

ing in his room; you’ll see it in a minute when Gregor 
opens the door. I must say I’m glad you’ve come, sir; we 
should never have got him to unlock the door by our- 
selves; he’s so obstinate; and I’m sure he’s unwell, 
though he wouldn’t have it to be so this morning.” 
'‘I’m just coming,” said Gregor slowly and carefully, 
not moving an inch for fear of losing one word of the 
conversation. “I can’t think ot any other explanation, 
madam,” said the chief clerk. “I hope it’s nothing seri- 
ous. Although on the other hand I must say that we men 
of business — fortunately or unfortunately — very often 
simply have to ignore any slight indisposition, since 
business must be attended to.” “Well, can the chief 
clerk come in now?” asked Gregor’s father impatiently, 
again knocking on the door. “No,” said Gregor. In the 
left-hand room a painful silence followed this refusal; 
in the right-hand room his sister began to sob. 

Why didn’t his sister join the others? She was proba- 
bly newly out of bed and hadn’t even begun to put on 
her clothes yet. Well, why was she crying? Because he 
wouldn’t get up and let the chief clerk in, because he 
was in danger of losing his job, and because the chiel 
would begin dunning his parents again for the old 
debts? Surely these were things one didn’t need to worr^ 
about for the present. Gregor was still at home and not 
in the least thinking of deserting the family. At the 
moment, true, he was lying on the carpet and no one 
who knew the condition he was in could seriously expecf 
him to admit the chief clerk. But for such a small dis-^ 
courtesy, which could plausibly be explained away 
somehow later on, Gregor could hardly be dismissed on 



THE metamorphosis 


3^^ 

the spot. And it seemed to Gregor that it would be much 
more sensible to leave him in peace for the present than 
to trouble him with tears and entreaties. Still, of course, 
their uncertainty bewildered them all and excused their 
behavior. 

“Mr. Samsa,” the chief clerk called now in a louder 
voice, “what’s the matter with you? Here you are, bar- 
ricading yourself in your room, giving only ‘yes’ and 
‘no’ for answers, causing your parents a lot of unneces- 
sary trouble and neglecting — I mention this only in 
passing — neglecting your business duties in an incredi- 
ble fashion. I am speaking here in the name of your 
parents and of your chief, and I beg you quite seriously 
to give me an immediate and precise explanation. You 
amaze me, you amaze me. I thought you were a quiet, 
dependable person, and now all at once you seem bent 
on making a disgraceful exhibition of yourself. The 
chief did hint to me early this morning a possible expla- 
nation for your disappearance — with reference to the 
cash payments that were entrusted to you recently — ^but^ 
I almost pledged my solemn word of honor that this 
could not be so. But now that I see how incredibly ob- 
stinate you are, I no longer have the slightest desire to 
take your part at all. And your position in the firm is not 
so unassailable. I came with the intention of telling you 
all this in private, but since you are wasting my time so 
needlessly I don’t see why your parents shouldn’t hear 
it too. For some time past your work has been most un- 
satisfactory; this is not the season of the year for a busi- 
ness boom, of course, we admit that, but a season of the 



THE METAMORPHOSIS 

year for doing no business at all, that does not exist, 
Mr. Samsa, must not exist/* 

“But, sir,'* cried Gregor, beside himself and in his agi- 
tation forgetting everything else, “Fm just going to open 
the door this very minute. A slight illness, an attack of 
giddiness, has kept me from getting up. Fm still lying 
in bed. But I feel all right again. I’m getting out of bed 
now. Just give me a moment or two longer! I’m not 
quite so well as I thought. But I’m all right, really. How 
a thing like that can suddenly strike one down! Only last 
night I was quite well, my parents can tell you, or rather 
I did have a slight presentiment. I must have showed 
some sign of it. Why didn’t I report it at the office! But 
one always thinks that an indisposition can be got over 
without staying in the house. Oh, sir, do spare my par- 
ents! All that you’re reproaching me with now has no 
foundation; no one has ever said a word to me about it. 
Perhaps you haven’t looked at the last orders I sent in. 
Anyhow, I can still catch the eight-o’clock train, Fm 
much the better for my few hours’ rest. Don’t let me 
detain you here, sir; I’ll be attending to business very 
soon, and do be good enough to tell the chief so and to 
make my excuses to him!” 

And while all this was tumbling out pell-mell and 
Gregor hardly knew what he was saying, he had reached 
the chest quite easily, perhaps because of the practice 
he had had in bed, and was now trying to lever himself 
upright by means of it. He meant actually to open the 
door, actually to show himself and speak to the chiel 
clerk; he was eager to find out what the others, after all 



THE METAMORPHOSIS 


32 

their insistence, would say at the sight of him. If they 
were horrified then the responsibility was no longer his 
and he could stay quiet. But if they took it calmly, then 
he had no reason either to be upset, and could really 
get to the station for the eight-o’clock train if he hurried. 
At first he slipped down a few times from the polished 
surface of the chest, but at length with a last heave he 
stood upright; he paid no more attention to the pains 
in the lower part of his body, however they smarted. 
Then he let himself fall against the back of a near-by 
chair, and clung with his little legs to the edges of it 
That brought him into control of himself again and he 
stopped speaking, for now he could listen to what the 
chief clerk was saying. 

*'Did you understand a word of it?” the chief clerk 
was asking; “surely he can’t be trying to make fools of 
us?” “Oh dear,” cried his mother, in tears, “perhaps 
he’s terribly ill and we’re tormenting him. Crete I 
Crete!” she called out then. “Yes, Mother?” called his 
sister from the other side. They were calling to each 
other across Cregor’s room. “You must go this minute 
for the doctor. Cregor is ill. Co for the doctor, quick. 
Did you hear how he was speaking?” “That was no hu- 
man voice,” said the chief clerk in a voice noticeably 
low beside the shrillness of the mother’s. “Anna! Anna!” 
his father was calling through the hall to the kitchen, 
dapping his hands, “get a locksmith at once!” And the 
two girls were already running through the hall with a 
swish of skirts — ^how could his sister have got dressed so 
quickly? — ^and were tearing the front door open. There 
was no sound of its closing again; they had evidently left 



THE METAMORPHOSIS 33 

it open, as one does in houses where some great misfop 
tune has happened. 

But Gregor was now much calmer. The words he 
uttered were no longer understandable, apparently, al- 
though they seemed clear enough to him, even clearft 
than before, perhaps because his ear had grown accus- 
tomed to the sound of them. Yet at any rate people no^v 
believed that something was wrong with him, and were 
ready to help him. The positive certainty with which 
these first measures had been taken comforted him. He 
felt himself drawn once more into the human circle and 
hoped for great and remarkable results from both the 
doctor and the locksmith, without really distinguishing 
precisely between them. To make his voice as clear as 
possible for the decisive conversation that was now im- 
minent he coughed a little, as quietly as he could, of 
course, since this noise too might not sound like a hu- 
man cough for all he was able to judge. In the next room 
meanwhile there was complete silence. Perhaps his par- 
ents were sitting at the table with the chief clerk, whis- 
pering, perhaps they were all leaning against the door 
and listening. 

Slowly Gregor pushed the chair towards the door, 
then let go of it, caught hold of the door for support — 
the soles at the end of his little legs were somewhat 
sticky — and rested against it for a moment after his ef- 
forts. Then he set himself to turning the key in the lock 
with his mouth. It seemed, unhappily, that he hadn’t 
really any teeth — ^what could he grip the key with? — but 
on the other hand his jaws were certainly very strong; 
with their help he did manage to set the key in motion, 



THE METAMORPHOSIS 


34 

heedless of the fact that he tvas undoubtedly damaging 
them somewhere, since a brown fluid issued from his 
mouth, flowed over the key and dripped on the floor. 
“Just listen to that,” said the chief clerk next door; ‘‘he’s 
lurning the key.” That was a great encouragement to 
Gregor; but they should all have shouted encourage- 
ment to him, his father and mother too; “Go on, 
Gregor,” they should have called out, “keep going, hold 
on to that key!” And in the belief that they were all fol- 
lowing his efforts intently, he clenched his jaws reck- 
lessly on the key with all the force at his command. As 
the turning of the key progressed he circled round the 
lock, holding on now only with his mouth, pushing on 
the key, as required, or pulling it down again with all 
the weight of his body. The louder click of the finally 
yielding lock literally quickened Gregor. With a deep 
breath of relief he said to himself: “So I didn’t need the 
locksmith,” and laid his head on the handle to open the 
door wide. 

Since he had to pull the door towards him, he was 
still invisible when it was really wide open. He had to 
edge himself slowly round the near half of the double 
door, and to do it very carefully if he was not to fall 
plump upon his back just on the threshold. He was still 
carrying out this difficult manoeuvre, with no time to 
observe anything else, when he heard the chief clerk 
utter a loud “Oh!” — it sounded like a gust of wind — and 
now he could see the man, standing as he was nearest to 
the door, clapping one hand before his open mouth and 
slowly backing away as if driven by some invisible steady 
pressure. His mother— in spite of the chief clerk’s being 



THE METAMORPHOSIS 


35 

there her hair was still undone and sticking up in all 
directions — first clasped her hands and looked at his 
father, then took two steps towards Gregor and fell on 
the floor among her outspread skirts, her face quite hid- 
den on her breast. His father knotted his fist with a fierce 
expression on his face as if he meant to knock Gregor 
back into his room, then looked uncertainly round the 
living room, covered his eyes with his hands and wept 
till his great chest heaved. 

Gregor did not go now into the living room, but 
leaned against the inside of the firmly shut wing of the 
door, so that only half his body was visible and his head 
above it bending sideways to look at the others. The 
light had meanwhile strengthened; on the other side of 
the street one could see clearly a section of the endlessly 
long, dark-gray building opposite — it was a hospital — 
abruptly punctuated by its row of regular windows; the 
rain was still falling, but only in large singly discernible 
and literally singly splashing drops. The breakfast dishes 
were set out on the table lavishly, for breakfast was the 
most important meal of the day to Gregor’s father, who 
lingered it out for hours over various newspapers. Right 
opposite Gregor on the wall hung a photograph of him- 
self on military service, as a lieutenant, hand on sword, 
a carefree smile on his face, inviting one to respect his 
uniform and military bearing. The door leading to the 
hall was open, and one could see that the front door 
stood open too, showing the landing beyond and the be- 
ginning of the stairs going down. 

‘‘Well,” said Gregor, knowing perfectly that he was 
the only one who had retained any composure, “I’ll put 



THE METAMORPHOSIS 


3^ 

my clothes on at once, pack up my samples and start off. 
Will you only let me go? You see, sir, Tm not obstinate, 
and I’m willing to work; traveling is a hard life, but I 
couldn’t live without it. Where are you going, sir? To 
the office? Yes? Will you give a true account of all this? 
One can be temporarily incapacitated, but that’s just 
the moment for remembering former services and bear- 
ing in mind that later on, wiien the incapacity has been 
got over, one will certainly work with all the more in- 
dustry and concentration, Fm loyally bound to serve 
the chief, you know that very well. Besides, I have to 
provide for my parents and my sister. Fm in great diffi- 
culties, but I’ll get out of them again. Don’t make things 
any worse for me than they are. Stand up for me in the 
firm. Travelers are not popular there, I know. People 
tliink they earn sacks of money and j ust have a good time. 
A prejudice there’s no particular reason for revising. 
But you, sir, have a more comprehensive view of affairs 
than the rest of the staff, yes, let me tell you in confi- 
dence, a more comprehensive view than the chief him- 
self, who, being the owner, lets his judgment easily be 
swayed against one of his employees. And you know 
very well that the traveler, who is never seen in the office 
almost the whole year round, can so easily fall a victim 
to gossip and ill luck and unfounded complaints, which 
he mostly knows nothing about, except when he comes 
back exhausted from his rounds, and only then suffers 
in person from their evil consequences, which he can no 
longer trace back to the original causes. Sir, sir, don’t 
go away without a word to me to show that you think me 
in the right at least to some extent!” 



THE METAMORPHOSIS 37 

But at Gregor’s very first words the chief clerk had 
already backed away and only stared at him with parted 
lips over one twitching shoulder. And while Gregor was 
speaking he did not stand still one moment but stole 
away towards the door, without taking his eyes off 
Gregor, yet only an inch at a time, as if obeying some 
secret injunction to leave the room. He was already at 
the hall, and the suddenness with which he took his last 
step out of the living room would have made one believe 
he had burned the sole of his foot. Once in the hall he 
stretched his right arm before him towards the stair- 
case, as if some supernatural power were waiting there 
to deliver him. 

Gregor perceived that the chief clerk must on no ac- 
count be allowed to go away in this frame of mind if his 
position in the firm were not to be endangered to the 
utmost. His parents did not understand this so well; 
they had convinced themselves in the course of years that 
Gregor was settled for life in this firm, and besides they 
were so preoccupied with their immediate troubles that 
all foresight had forsaken them. Yet Gregor had this 
foresight. The chief clerk must be detained, soothed, 
persuaded and finally won over; the whole future of 
Gregor and his family depended on itl If only his sister 
had been there! She was intelligent; she had begun to 
cry while Gregor was still lying quietly on his back. And 
no doubt the chief clerk, so partial to ladies, would have 
been guided by her; she would have shut the door of the 
flat and in the hall talked him out of his horror. But she 
was not there, and Gregor would have to handle the 
situation himself. And without remembering that he 



38 THE METAMORPHOSIS 

was Still unaware ’^viiat powers of movement he pos- 
sessed, without even remembering that iiis words in all 
possibility, indeed in all likelihood, would again be un- 
intelligible, he let go the tving oi the door, pushed him- 
self through the opening, started to walk towards the 
chief clerk, who tvas already ridiculously clinging with 
both hands to the railing on the landing: but immedi- 
ately, as he was feeling for a support, he fell down with 
a little cry upon all his numerous legs. Hardly was he 
down when he experienced for the first time this morn- 
ing a sense of physical comfort; his legs had firm ground 
under them; they were completely obedient, as he noted 
with joy; they even strove to carry him forward in 
wdiatever direction he chose; and he was inclined to be- 
lieve that a final relief from all his sufferings was at hand. 
But in the same moment as he found himself on the floor, 
rocking with suppressed eagerness to move, not far from 
his mother, indeed just in front of her, she, who had 
seemed so completely crushed, sprang all at once to her 
feet, her arms and fingers outspread, cried: '*HeIp, for 
God's sake, help!" bent her head down as if to see Gregor 
better, yet on the contrary kept backing senselessly away; 
had quite forgotten that the laden table stood behind 
her; sat upon it hastily, as if in absence of mind, when 
she bumped into it; and seemed altogether unaware that 
the big coffee pot beside her was upset and pouring coffee 
in a flood over the carpet. 

^'Mother, Mother/’ said Gregor in a lovr voice, and 
looked up at her. The chief clerk, for the moment, had 
quite slipped from his mind; instead, he could not resist 
snapping his jaws together at the sight of the streaming 



THE METAMORPHOSIS 39 

coffee. That made his mother scream again. She fled 
from the table and fell into the arms of his father, who 
hastened to catch her. But Gregor had now no time to 
spare for his parents; the chief clerk was already on the 
stairs; with his chin on the banister he was taking one 
last backward look. Gregor made a spring, to be as sure 
as possible of overtaking him; the chief clerk must have 
divined his intention, for he leaped down several steps 
and vanished; he was still yelling ‘‘Ugh!” and it echoed 
through the whole staircase. 

Unfortunately, the flight of the chief clerk seemed com^ 
pletely to upset Gregor’s father, who had remained rela- 
tively calm until now, for instead of running after the 
man himself, or at least not hindering Gregor in his pur- 
suit, he seized in his right hand the walking stick which 
the chief clerk had left behind on a chair, together with 
a hat and greatcoat, snatched in his left hand a large 
newspaper from the table and began stamping his feet 
and flourishing the stick and the newspaper to drive 
Gregor back into his room. No entreaty of Gregor’s 
availed, indeed no entreaty was even understood; how- 
ever humbly he bent his head his father only stamped 
on the floor the more loudly. Behind his father his 
mother had torn open a window, despite the cold 
weather, and was leaning far out of it with her face in 
her hands. A strong draught set in from the street to the 
staircase, the window curtains blew in, the newspapers 
on the table fluttered, stray pages whisked over the floor. 
Pitilessly Gregor’s father drove him back, hissing and 
crying “Shoo!” like a savage. But Gregor was quite un- 
practiced in walking backwards, it really was a slow busi- 



THE METAMORPHOSIS 

ness. If he only had a chance to turn round he could get 
back to his room at once, but he iras afraid of exasperat- 
ing his father by the slowness of such a rotation and at 
any moment tlie stick in his father’s hand might hit him 
a fatal blow on the back or on the head. In the end, how- 
ever, nothing else was left for him to do since to his hor- 
ror he observed that in moving backivards he could not 
even control the direction he took; and so, keeping an 
anxious eye on his father all the time over his shoulder, 
he began to turn round as quickly as he could, which 
was in reality very slowly. Perhaps his father noted his 
good intentions, for he did not interfere except every 
now and then to help him in the manoeuvre from a 
distance with the point of the stick. If only he would 
have stopped making that unbearable hissing noise! It 
made Gregor quite lose his head. He had turned almost 
completely round when the hissing noise so distracted 
him that he even turned a little tire wrong way again. 
But when at last his head was fortunately right in front 
of the doorway, it appeared that his body was too broad 
simply to get through the opening. His father, of course, 
in his present mood was far from thinking of such a thing 
as opening the other half of the door, to let Gregor have 
enough space. He had merely the fixed idea of driving 
Gregor back into his room as quickly as possible. He 
would never have suffered Gregor to make the circum- 
stantial preparations for standing up on end and perhaps 
slipping his way through the door. Maybe he was now 
making more noise than ever to urge Gregor forward, as 
if no obstacle impeded him; to Gregor, anyhow, the noise 
in his rear sounded no longer like the voice of one single 



THE METAMORPHOSIS 4I 

father; this was really no joke, and Gregor thrust him- 
self — come what might — into the doorway. One side of 
his body rose up, he was tilted at an angle in the door 
way, his flank was quite bruised, horrid blotches stained 
the white door, soon he was stuck fast and, left to himself, 
could not have moved at all, his legs on one side flut 
tered trembling in the air, those on the other were 
crushed painfully to the floor — ^when from behind hi? 
father gave him a strong push which was literally a de- 
liverance and he flew far into the room, bleeding freely. 
The door was slammed behind him with the stick, and 
then at last there was silence. 


II 

Not until it was twilight did Gregor awake out of a 
deep sleep, more like a swoon than a sleep. He would 
certainly have waked up of his own accord not much 
later, for he felt himself sufficiently rested and well-slept, 
but it seemed to him as if a fleeting step and a c?*utious 
shutting of the door leading into the hall had aroused 
him. The electric lights in the street cast a pale sheen 
here and there on the ceiling and the upper surfaces 
of the furniture, but down below, where he lay, it was 
dark. Slowly, awkwardly trying out his feelers, which he 
now first learned to appreciate, he pushed his way to the 
door to see what had been happening there. His left side 
felt like one single long, unpleasantly tense scar, and he 
had actually to limp on his two rows of legs. One little 
leg, moreover, had been severely damaged in the course 



42 THE METAMORPHOSIS 

of that morning’s events — it was almost a miracle that 
only one had been damaged — and trailed uselessly be- 
hind him. 

He had reached the door before he discovered what 
had really drawn him to it: the smell of food. For there 
stood a basin filled with fresh milk in xvhich floated 
little sops of white bread. He could almost have laughed 
with joy, since he was now^ still hungrier than in the 
morning, and he dipped his head almost over the eyes 
straight into the milk. But soon in disappointment he 
withdrew it again; not only did he find it difficult to feed 
because of his tender left side — and he could only feed 
with the palpitating collaboration of his whole body — 
he did not like the milk either, although milk had been 
his favorite drink and that was certainly why his sister 
had set it there for him; indeed it was almost with re- 
pulsion that he turned away from the basin and 
crawled back to the middle of the room. 

He could see through the crack of the door that the 
gas was turned on in the living room, but while usually 
at this time his father made a habit of reading the after- 
noon newspaper in a loud voice to his mother and occa- 
sionally to his sister as well, not a sound was now to be 
heard. Well, perhaps his father had recently given up 
this habit of reading aloud, which his sister had men- 
tioned so often in conversation and in her letters. But 
there was the same silence all around, although the flat 
was certainly not empty of occupants. “What a quiet life 
our family has been leading/* said Gregor to himself, 
and as he sat there motionless staring into the darkness 
he felt great pride in the fact that he had been able to 



THE METAMORPHOSIS 43 

prov^ide such a life for his parents and sister in such a 
fine flat. But what if all the quiet, the comfort, the con- 
tentment were now to end in horror? To keep himself 
from being lost in such thoughts Gregor took refuge in 
movement and crawled up and down the room. 

Once during the long evening one of the side doors 
was opened a little and quickly shut again, later the 
other side door too; someone had apparently wanted to 
come in and then thought better of it. Gregor now sta- 
tioned himself immediately before the living-room door, 
determined to persuade any hesitating visitor to come 
in or at least to discover who it might be; but the door 
was not opened again and he waited in vain. In the early 
morning, when the doors were locked, they had all 
wanted to come in; now that he had opened one door 
and the other had apparently been opened during the 
day, no one came in and even the keys were on the other 
side of the doors. 

It was late at night before the gas went out in the liv- 
ing room, and Gregor could easily tell that his parents 
and his sister had all stayed awake until then, for he 
could clearly hear the three of them stealing away on 
tiptoe. No gne was likely to visit him, not until the 
morning, that was certain; so he had plenty of time to 
meditate at his leisure on how he was to arrange his life 
afresh. But the lofty, empty room in which he had to lie 
fiat on the floor filled him with an apprehension he 
could not account for, since it had been his very own 
room for the past five years — and with a half-unconscious 
action, not without a slight feeling of shame, he scuttled 
under the sofa, where he felt comfortable at once, ab 



THE METAMORPHOSIS 


44 

though his back was a little cramped and he could not 
lift his head up, and his only regxet was that his body 
was too broad to get the whoie of it under the sofa. 

He stayed there all night, spending the tiiire partly in 
a light slumber, from which his hunger kept waking 
him up with a start, and partly in worrying and sketch- 
ing vague hopes, which all led to the same conclusion, 
that he must lie low for the present and, by exercising 
patience and the utmost consideration, help the family 
to bear the inconvenience he was bound to cause them 
in his present condition. 

Very early in the morning, it was still almost night, 
Gregor had the chance to test the strength of his new 
resolutions, for his sister, nearly fully dressed, opened 
the door from the hall and peered in. She did not see 
him at once, yet when she caught sight of him under the 
sofa — well, he had to be somewhere, he couldn’t have 
flown away, could he? — she was so startled chat without 
being able to help it she slammed the door shut again. 
But as if regretting her behavior she opened the door 
again immediately and came in on tiptoe, as if she were 
visiting an invalid or even a stranger. Gregor had pushed 
his head forward to the very edge of the sofa and 
watched her. Would she notice that he had left the milk 
standing, and not for lack of hunger, and would she 
bring in some other kind of food more to his taste? If 
she did not do it of her own accord, he would rather 
starve than draw her attention to the fact, although he 
felt a wild impulse to dart out from under the sofa, 
throw himself at her feet and beg her for something to 
eat. But his sister at once noticed, with surprise, that the 



THE METAMORPHOSIS 45 

basin was still full, except for a little milk that had been 
spilt all around it, she lifted it immediately, not with 
her bare hands, true, but with a cloth and carried it away. 
Gregor was wildly curious to know what she would bring 
instead, and made various speculations about it. Yet 
what she actually did next, in the goodness of her heart, 
he could never have guessed at. To find out what he liked 
she brought him a whole selection of food, all set out on 
an old newspaper. There were old, half-decayed veg- 
etables, bones from last night’s supper covered with a 
white sauce that had thickened; some raisins and al- 
monds; a piece of cheese that Gregor would have called 
uneatable two days ago; a dry roll of bread, a buttered 
roll, and a roll both buttered and salted. Besides all that, 
she set down again the same basin, into which she had 
poured some water, and which was apparently to be 
reserved for his exclusive use. And with fine tact, know- 
ing that Gregor would not eat in her presence, she with- 
drew quickly and even turned the key, to let him under- 
stand that he could take his ease as much as he liked. 
Gregor’s legs all whizzed towards the food. His wounds 
must have healed completely, moreover, for he felt no 
disability, which amazed him and made him reflect how 
more than a month ago he had cut one finger a little with 
a knife and had still suffered pain from the wound only 
the day before yesterday. Am I less sensitive now? he 
thought, and sucked greedily at the cheese, which above 
all the other edibles attracted him at once and strongly. 
One after another and with tears of satisfaction in his 
eyes he quickly devoured the cheese, the vegetables and 
the sauce; the fresh food, on the other hand, had no 



46 THE METAMORPHOSIS 

charms for him, he could not even stand the smell of it 
and actually dragged away to some little distance the 
things he could eat. He had long finished his meal and 
was only lying lazily on the same spot when his sister 
turned the key slowly as a sign for him to retreat. That 
roused him at once, although he was nearly asleep, and 
he hurried under the sofa again. But it took considerable 
self-control for him to stay under the sofa, even for the 
short time his sister was in the room, since the large meal 
had swollen his body somewhat and he tvas so cramped 
he could hardly breathe. Slight attacks of breathlessness 
afifticted him and his eyes were starting a little out of 
his head as he watched his unsuspecting sister sweeping 
together w'ith a broom not only the remains of what he 
had eaten but even the things he had not touched, as if 
these tvere now of no use to anyone, and hastily shoveling 
it all into a bucket, which she covered with a wooden lid 
and carried away. Hardly had she turned her back when 
Gregor came from under the sofa and stretched and 
puffed himself out. 

In this manner Gregor w'as fed, once in the early 
morning while his parents and the servant girl were still 
asleep, and a second time after they had all had thei- 
midday dinner, for then his parents took a short nap 
and the servant girl could be sent out on some errand 
or other by his sister. Not that they would have wanted 
him to starve, of course, but perhaps they could not havt 
borne to know more about his feeding than from hear- 
say, perhaps too his sister wanted to spare them such 
little anxieties wherever possible, since they had quite 
enough to bear as it was. 



THE METAMORPHOSIS 


47 

Under what pretext the doctor and the locksmith had 
been got rid of on that first morning Gregor could not 
discover, for since what he said was not understood by 
the others, it never struck any of them, not even his sis- 
ter, that he could understand what they said, and so 
whenever his sister came into his room he had to content 
himself with hearing her utter only a sigh now and then 
and an occasional appeal to the saints. Later on, when 
she had got a little used to the situation — of course she 
could never get completely used to it — she sometimes 
threw out a remark which was kindly meant or could be 
so interpreted. ‘‘Well, he liked his dinner today,” she 
would say when Gregor had made a good clearance of 
his food; and when he had not eaten, which gradually 
happened more and more often, she woiald say almost 
sadly: “Everything’s been left standing again.” 

But although Gregor could get no news directly, he 
overheard a lot from the neighboring rooms, and as soon 
as voices were audible, he would run to the door of the 
room concerned and press his whole body against it. In 
the first few days especially there was no conversation 
that did not refer to him somehow, even if only indi- 
rectly. For two whole days there were family consulta- 
tions at every mealtime about what should be done; 
but also between meals the same subject was discussed, 
for there were always at least two members of the family 
at home, since no one wanted to be alone in the flat and 
to leave it quite empty was unthinkable. And on the very 
first of these days the household cook — it was not quite 
clear what and how much she knew of the situation — 
went down on her knees to his mother and begged leave 



^8 THE METAMORPHOSIS 

to go, and when she departed, a quarter of an hour later, 
gave thanks for her dismissal with tears in her eyes as 
if for the greatest benefit that could have been conferred 
on her, and without any prompting s^vore a solemn oath 
that she would never say a single word to anyone about 
what had happened. 

Now Gregor’s sister had to cook too, helping her 
mother; true, the cooking did not amount to much, for 
they ate scarcely anything. Gregor was always hearing 
one of the family vainly urging another to eat and get- 
ting no answer but: “Thanks, I’ve had all I want,” or 
something similar. Perhaps they drank nothing either. 
Time and again his sister kept asking his father if he 
wouldn’t like some beer and offered kindly to go and 
fetch it herself, and when he made no answer suggested 
that she could ask the concierge to fetch it, so that he 
need feel no sense of obligation, but then a round “No” 
came from his father and no more was said about it. 

In the course of that very first day Gregor’s father 
explained the family’s financial position and prospects to 
both his mother and his sister. Now and then he rose 
from the table to get some voucher or memorandum out 
of the small safe he had rescued from the collapse of his 
business five years earlier. One could hear him open- 
ing the complicated lock and rustling papers out and 
shutting it again. This statement made by his father was 
the first cheerful information Gregor had heard since 
his imprisonment. He had been of the opinion that 
nothing at all was left over from his father’s business; at 
least his father had never said anything to the contrary, 
and of course he had not asked him directly. At that 



THE METAMORPHOSIS 


49 

time Gregor s sole desire was to do his utmost to help 
the family to forget as soon as possible the catastrophe 
which had overwhelmed the business and thrown them 
all into a state of complete despair. And so he had set 
to work with unusual ardor and almost overnight had 
become a commercial traveler instead of a little clerk, 
with of course much greater chances of earning money, 
and his success was immediately translated into good 
round coin which he could lay on the table for hh 
amazed and happy family. These had been fine times, 
and they had never recurred, at least not with the same 
sense of glory, although later on Gregor had earned so 
much money that he was able to meet the expenses of 
the whole household and did so. They had simply got 
used to it, both the family and Gregor; the money was 
gratefully accepted and gladly given, but there was no 
special uprush of warm feeling. With his sister alone had 
he remained intimate, and it was a secret plan of his that 
she, who loved music, unlike himself, and could play 
movingly on the violin, should be sent next year to stud^ 
at the Conservatorium, despite the great expense that 
would entail, which must be made up in some other way. 
During his brief visits home the Conseivatorium was 
often mentioned in the talks he had with his sister, but 
always merely as a beautiful dream which could never 
come true, and his parents discouraged even these in- 
nocent references to it; yet Gregor had made up his 
mind firmly about it and meant to announce the fact 
with due solemnity on Christmas Day. 

Such were the thoughts, completely futile in his pres- 
ent condition, that went through his head as he stood 



50 THE METAMORPHOSIS 

clinging upright to the door and listening. Sometimes 
out of sheer weariness he had to give up listening and 
let his head fall negligently against the door, but he al- 
ways had to pull himself together again at once, for even 
the slight sound his head made was audible next door 
and brought all conversation to a stop. “What can he be 
doing now?” his father would say after a while, obviously 
turning toxv^ards tlie door, and only then would the in- 
terrupted conversation gradually be set going again. 

Gregor was now informed as amply as he could wish 
— for his father tended to repeat himself in his explana- 
tions, partly because it xvas a long time since he had 
handled su(!:h matters and partly because his mother 
could not always grasp things at once — that a certain 
amount of investments, a very small amount it was true, 
had survived the wreck of their fortunes and had even 
increased a little because the dividends had not been 
touched meanwhile. And besides that, the money Gregor 
brought home every month — he had kept only a few 
dollars for himself — ^Iiad never been quite used up and 
now amounted to a small capital sum. Behind the door 
Gregor nodded his head eagerly, rejoiced at this evi- 
dence of unexpected thrift and foresight. True, he could 
really have paid off some more of his father's debts to 
the chief with this extra money, and so brought much 
nearer the day on which he could quit his Job, but 
doubtless it was better the way his father had arranged it. 

Yet this capital was by no means sufficient to let the 
family live on the interest of it; for one year, perhaps, 
or at the most two, they could live on the principal, that 
was all. It was simply a sum that ought not to be touched 



THE METAMORPHOSIS 5I 

and should be kept for a rainy day; money for living 
expenses would have to be earned. Now his father was 
still hale enough but an old man, and he had done no 
work for the past five years and could not be expected 
to do much; during these five years, the first years of 
leisure in his laborious though unsuccessful life, he had 
grown rather fat and become sluggish. And Gregor's 
old mother, how was she to earn a living with her 
asthma, which troubled her even when she walked 
through the flat and kept her lying on a sofa every other 
day panting for breath beside an open window? And 
was his sister to earn hej bread, she who was still a child 
of seventeen and whose life hitherto had been so pleas- 
ant, consisting as it did in dressing herself nicely, sleep- 
ing long, helping in the housekeeping, going out to a 
few modest entertainments and above all playing the 
violin? At first whenever the need for earning money 
was mentioned Gregor let go his hold on the door and 
threw himself down on the cool leather sofa beside it, he 
felt so hot with shame and grief. 

Often he just lay there the long nights through with- 
out sleeping at all, scrabbling for hours on the leather. 
Or he nerved himself to the great effort of pushing an 
armchair to the window, then crawled up over the win- 
dow sill and, braced against the chair, leaned against 
the windowpanes, obviously in some recollection of the 
sense of freedom that looking out of a window always 
used to give him. For in reality day by day things that 
were even a little way off were growing dimmer to his 
sight; the hospital across the street, which he used to 
execrate for being all too often before his eyes, was now 



52 THE METAMORPHOSIS 

quite beyond his range o£ vision, and if he had not 
known that he lived in Charlotte Street, a quiet street 
but still a city street, he might have believed that his 
window gave on a desert waste where gray sky and gray 
[and blended indistinguishably into each other. His 
quick-witted sister only needed to observe twice that 
the armchair stood by the window; after that whenever 
she had tidied the room she always pushed the chair 
back to the same place at the window and even left the 
inner casements open. 

If he could have spoken to her and thanked her for 
all she had to do for him, he could have borne her minis- 
trations better; as it was, they oppressed him. She cer- 
tainly tried to make as light as possible of whatever was 
disagreeable in her task, and as time went on she suc- 
ceeded, of course, more and more, but time brought 
more enlightenment to Gregor too. The very way she 
came in distressed him. Hardly was she in the room 
when she rushed to the window, without even taking 
time to shut the door, careful as she was usually to shield 
the sight of Gregor’s room from the others, and as if 
she were almost suffocating tore the casements open 
with hasty fingers, standing then in the open draught 
for a while even in the bitterest cold and drawing deep 
breaths. This noisy scurry of hers upset Gregor twice 
a day; he would crouch trembling under the sofa all 
the time, knowing quite well that she would certainly 
have spared him such a disturbance had she found it at 
all possible to stay in his presence without opening the 
window. 

On one occasion, about a month after Gregor’s meta- 



THE METAMORPHOSIS 53 

morphosis, when there was surely no reason for her to 
be still startled at his appearance, she came a little 
earlier than usual and found him gazing out of the win- 
dow, quite motionless, and thus well placed to look like 
a bogey. Gregor would not have been surprised had she 
not come in at all, for she could not immediately open 
the window while he was there, but not only did she 
retreat, she jumped back as if in alarm and banged the 
door shut; a stranger might well have thought that he 
had been lying in wait for her there meaning to bite 
her. Of course he hid himself under the sofa at once, 
but he had to wait until midday before she came again, 
and she seemed more ill at ease than usual. This made 
him realize how repulsive the sight of him still was to 
her, and that it was bound to go on being repulsive, and 
what an eiffort it must cost her not to run away even from 
the sight of the small portion of his body that stuck out 
from under the sofa. In order to spare her that, there- 
fore, one day he carried a sheet on his back to the sofa 
— it cost him four hours' labor — ^and arranged it there in 
such a way as to hide him completely, so that even if she 
xvere to bend down she could not see him. Had she con- 
sidered the sheet unnecessary, she would certainly have 
stripped it off the sofa again, for it was clear enough that 
this curtaining and confining of himself was not likely 
to conduce to Gregor’s comfort, but she left it where 
it was, and Gregor even fancied that he caught a thank- 
ful glance from her eye when he lifted the sheet care- 
fully a very little with his head to see how she was taking 
the new airangemerit. 

For the first fortnight his parents could not bring 



THE METAMORPHOSIS 


54 

themselves to the point of entering his room, and he 
often heard them expressing their appreciation of his 
sister's activities, whereas formerly they had frequently 
scolded her for being as they thought a somewhat use- 
less daughter. But now, both of them often waited out- 
side the door, his father and his mother, while his sister 
tidied his room, and as soon as slie came out she had to 
tell them exactly how things were in the room, '^vhat 
Gregor had eaten, how he had conducted himself this 
time and whether there was not perhaps some sliglit 
improvement in his condition. His mother, moreover, 
began relatively soon to want to visit him, but his father 
and sister dissuaded her at first with arguments which 
Gregor listened to very attentively and altogether ap- 
proved. Later, however, she had to be held back by main 
force, and when she cried out: ‘'Do let me in to Gregor, 
he is my unfortunate son! Can’t you understand that 
I must go to him?” Gregor thought that it might be xvell 
to have her come in, not every day, of course, but per- 
haps once a week; she understood things, after all, much 
better than his sister, who was only a child despite the 
efforts she was making and had perhaps taken on so 
difficult a task merely out of childish thoughtlessness. 

Gregor’s desire to see his mother was soon fulfilled. 
During the daytime he did not want to show himself at 
the window, out of consideration for his parents, but 
he could not crawl very far around the few square yards 
of floor space he had, nor could he bear lying quietly at 
rest all during the night, while he was fast losing any 
interest he had ever taken in food, so that for mere rec- 
reation he had formed the habit of crawling criss- 



THE METAMORPHOSIS 


55 

cross over the walls and ceiling. He especially enjoyed 
hanging suspended from the ceiling; it was much better 
than lying on the floor; one could breathe more freely; 
one’s body swung and rocked lightly; and in the almost 
blissful absorption induced by this suspension it could 
happen to his own surprise that he let go and fell plump 
on the floor. Yet he now had his body much better under 
control than formerly, and even such a big fall did him 
no harm. His sister at once remarked the new distrac- 
tion Gregor had found for himself — he left traces be- 
hind him of the sticky stuff on his soles wherever he 
crawled — ^and she got the idea in her head of giving him 
as wide a field as possible to crawl in and of removing 
the pieces of furniture that hindered him, above all the 
chest of drawers and the writing desk. But that was 
more than she could manage all by herself; she did not 
dare ask her father to help her; and as for the servant 
girl, a young creature of sixteen who had had the cour- 
age to stay on after the cook’s departure, she could not 
be asked to help, for she had begged as an especial favor 
that she might keep the kitchen door locked and open it 
only on a definite summons; so there was nothing left 
but to apply to her mother at an hour when her father 
was out. And the old lady did come, with exclamations 
of joyful eagerness, which, however, died away at the 
door of Gregor’s room. Gregor’s sister, of course, went 
in first, to see that everything was in order before letting 
his mother enter. In great haste Gregor pulled the sheet 
lower and rucked it more in folds so that it really looked 
as if it had been thrown accidentally over the sofa. And 
this time he did not peer out from under it; he 



^6 THE METAMORPHOSIS 

renounced the pleasure of seeing his mother on this oc- 
casion and was only glad that she had come at alL ‘'Come 
in, he's out of sight,” said his sister, obviously leading 
her mother in by the hand, Gregor could nowr hear the 
two women struggling to shift the heavy old chest from 
its place, and his sister claiming the greater pait of the 
labor for herself, wdthout listening to the admonitions 
of her mother who feared she might overstrain herself. 
It took a long time. After at least a quarter of an hour’s 
tugging his mother objected that the chest had better be 
left where it was, for in the first place it Tvas too heavy 
and could never be got out before his father came home; 
standing in the middle of the room like that it would 
only hamper. Gregor’s movements, while in the second 
place it was not at all certain that removing the furni- 
ture would be doing a service to Gregor. She was in- 
clined to think to the contrary; the sight of the naked 
walls made her own heart heavy, and why shouldn’t 
Gregor have the same feeling, considering that he had 
been used to his furniture for so long and might feel 
forlorn without it. ''And doesn’t it look,” she concluded 
in a low voice — in fact she had been almost whispering 
all the time as if to avoid letting Gregor, whose exact 
whereabouts she did not know, hear even the tones of her 
voice, for she was convinced that he could not under- 
stand her words — “doesn’t it look as if we were showing 
him, by taking away his furniture, that we have given 
up hope of his ever getting better and are just leaving 
him coldly to himself? I think it would be best to keep 
his room exactly as it has always been, so that when he 
comes back to us he will find everything unchanged and 



THE METAMORPHOSIS 57 

be able all the more easily to forget what has happened 
in between/' 

On hearing these words from his mother Gregor re- 
alized that the lack of all direct human speech for the 
past two months together with the monotony of family 
life must have confused his mind, otherwise he could 
not account for the fact that he had quite earnestly 
looked forward to having his room emptied of furnish- 
ing. Did he really want his warm room, so comfortably 
fitted with old family furniture, to be turned into a 
naked den in which he would certainly be able to crawl 
unhampered in all directions but at the price of shed- 
ding simultaneously all recollection of his human back- 
ground? He had indeed been so near the brink of for- 
getfulness that only the voice of his mother, which he 
had not heard for so long, had drawn him back from it. 
Nothing should be taken out of his room; everything 
must stay as it was; he could not dispense with the good 
influence of the furniture on his state of mind; and even 
if the furniture did hamper him in his senseless crawling 
round and round, that was no drawback but a great ad- 
vantage. 

Unfortunately his sister was of the contrary opinion; 
she had grown accustomed, and not without reason, to 
consider herself an expert in Gregor's affairs as against 
her parents, and so her mother's advice was now enough 
to make her determined on the removal not only of 
the chest and the writing desk, which had been her first 
intention, but of all the furniture except the indispensa- 
ble sofa. This determination was not, of course, merely 
the outcome of childish recalcitrance and of the self- 



THE METAMORPHOSIS 


58 

confidence she had recently developed so unexpectedly 
and at such cost; she had in fact perceived that Gregor 
needed a lot of space to crawl about in, while on the 
other hand he never used the furniture at all, so far as 
could be seen. Another factor might have been also the 
enthusiastic temperament of an adolescent girl, which 
seeks to indulge itself on every opportunity and which 
now tempted Grete to exaggerate the horror of her 
brother’s circumstances in order that she might do all 
the more for him. In a room where Gregor lorded it 
all alone over empty walls no one save herself was likely 
ever to set foot. 

And so she was not to be moved from her resolve by 
her mother, who seemed moreover to be ill at ease in 
Gregor’s room and therefore unsure of herself, was soon 
reduced to silence and helped her daughter as best she 
could to push the chest outside. Now, Gregor could do 
without the chest, if need be, but the writing desk he 
must retain. As soon as the two women had got the chest 
out of his room, groaning as they pushed it, Gregor stuck 
his head out from under the sofa to see how he might 
intervene as kindly and cautiously as possible. But as 
bad luck would have it, his mother was the first to return, 
leaving Grete clasping the chest in the room next door 
where she was trying to shift it all by herself, without of 
course moving it from the spot. His mother however was 
not accustomed to the sight of him; it might sicken her 
and so in alarm Gregor backed quickly to the other end 
of the sofa, yet could not prevent the sheet from swaying 
a little in front. That was enough to put her on the alert. 



THE METAMORPHOSIS 5Q 

She paused, stood still for a moment and then went back 
to Crete. 

Although Gregor kept reassuring himself that nothing 
out of the way was happening, but only a few bits of 
furniture were being changed round, he soon had to 
admit that all this trotting to and fro of the two 
women, their little ejaculations and the scraping of fur- 
niture along the floor affected him like a vast disturb- 
ance coming from all sides at once, and however much 
he tucked in his head and legs and cowered to the very 
floor he was bound to confess that he would not be able 
to stand it for long. They were clearing his room out; 
taking away everything he loved; the chest in which he 
kept his fret saw and other tools was already dragged 
off; they were now loosening the writing desk which had 
almost sunk into the floor, the desk at which he had 
done all his homework when he was at the commercial 
academy, at the grammar school before that, and, yes, 
even at the primary school — he had no more time to 
waste in weighing the good intentions of the two women, 
whose existence he had by now almost forgotten, for 
they were so exhausted that they were laboring in silence 
and nothing could be heard but the heavy scuffling of 
their feet. 

And so he rushed out — the women were just leaning 
against the writing desk in the next room to give them- 
selves a breather — and four times changed his direction, 
since he really did not know what to rescue first; then 
on the wall opposite, which was already otherwise 
cleared, he was struck by the picture of the lady muffled 



6o THE METAMORPHOSIS 

in SO much fur and quickly crawled up to it and pressed 
himself to the glass, which was a good surface to hold 
on to and comforted his hot belly. This picture at least, 
which was entirely hidden beneath him, was going to 
be removed by nobody. He turned his head towards the 
door of the living room so as to observe the women when 
they came back. 

They had not allowed themselves much of a rest and 
were already coming; Crete had twined her arm round 
her mother and was almost supporting her. '‘Well, what 
shall we take now?'' said Crete, looking round. Her eyes 
met Gregor’s from the wall. She kept her composure, 
presumably because of her mother, bent her head down 
to her mother, to keep her from looking up, and said, 
altliough in a fluttering, unpremeditated voice: “Come, 
hadn't we better go back to the living room for a mo- 
ment?’' Her intentions were clear enough to Gregor; she 
wanted to bestow her mother in safety and then chase 
him down from the wall. Well, just let her try it! He 
clung to his picture and would not give it up. He would 
rather fly in Crete's face. 

But Crete’s words had succeeded in disquieting her 
mother, who took a step to one side, caught sight of the 
huge brown mass on the flowered wallpaper, and before 
she was really conscious that what she saw was Gregor 
screamed in a loud, hoarse voice: “Oh God, oh God!" fell 
with outspread arms over the sofa as if giving up and did 
not move. “Gregor!" cried his sister, shaking her fist and 
glaring at him. This was the first time she had directly 
addressed him since his metamorphosis. She ran into the 
next room for some aromatic essence with which to rouse 



THE METAMORPHOSIS 6l 

her mother from her fainting fit. Gregor wanted to help 
too — there was still time to rescue the picture — but he 
was stuck fast to the glass and had to tear himself loose; 
he then ran after his sister into the next room as if he 
could advise her, as he used to do; but then had to stand 
helplessly behind her; she meanwhile searched among 
various small bottles and when she turned round started 
in alarm at the sight of him; one bottle fell on the floor 
and broke; a splinter of glass cut Gregor’s face and some 
kind of corrosive medicine splashed him; without paus' 
ing a moment longer Grete gathered up all the bottles 
she could carry and ran to her mother with them; she 
banged the door shut with her foot. Gregor was now cut 
off from his mother, who was perhaps nearly dying be- 
cause of him; he dared not open the door for fear of 
frightening away his sister, who had to stay with hei 
mother; there was nothing he could do but wait; and 
harassed by self-reproach and worry he began now to 
crawl to and fro, over everything, walls, furniture and 
ceiling, and finally in his despair, when the whole room 
seemed to be reeling round him, fell down on to the 
middle of the big table. 

A little while elapsed. Gregor was still lying there 
feebly and all around was quiet; perhaps that was a good 
omen. Then the doorbell rang. The servant girl was of 
course locked in her kitchen, and Grete would have to 
open the door. It was his father. '‘What’s been happen- 
ing?” were his first words; Grete’s face must have told 
him everything. Grete answered in a muffled voice, ap* 
parently hiding her head on his breast: “Mother has 
been fainting, but she’s better now. Gregor’s broken 



62 THE METAMORPHOSIS 

loose/' “Just what I expected/' said lus father, “just what 
I’ve been telling you, but you women would never 
listen.” It was clear to Gregor that his father had taken 
the worst inierpictation ot Crete's all too brief state- 
ment and ’ivas assuming that Gregor had been guilty of 
some violent act. Therelore Gregor must now try to 
propitiate his father, since he had neither time nor 
means for an explanation. And so he fled to the door of 
his owm room and crouched against it, to let his father 
see as soon as he came in from tlie hall that his son had 
the good intention of getting back into his room imme- 
diately and that it was not necessary to drive him there, 
but that if only the door were opened he would disap- 
pear at once. 

Yet his father was not in the mood to perceive such 
fine distinctions. “Ah!” he cried as soon as he appeared, 
in a tone which sounded at once angry and exultant. 
Gregor drew his head back from the door and lifted it 
to look at his father. Truly, this was not the father he 
had imagined to himself; admittedly he had been too 
^absorbed of late in his new recreation of crawling over 
?.he ceiling to take the same interest as before in what 
ivas happening elsewhere in the flat, and he ought really 
to be prepared for some changes. And yet, and yet, 
could that be his father? The man who used to lie wear- 
ily sunk in bed whenever Gregor set out on a business 
journey; who welcomed him back of an evening lying 
in a long chair in a dressing gown; who could not really 
rise to his feet but only lifted his arms in greeting, and 
on the rare occasions when he did go out with his family, 
on one or two Sundays a year and on high holidays, 



THE METAMORPHOSIS Gg 

walked between Gregor and his mother, who were slow 
walkers anyhow, even more slowly than they did, muf- 
fled in his old greatcoat, shuffling laboriously forward 
with the help of his crook-handled stick which he set 
down most cautiously at every step and, whenever he 
wanted to say anything, nearly always came to a full stop 
and gathered his escort around him? Now he was stand- 
ing there in fine shape; dressed in a smart blue uniform 
with gold buttons, such as bank messengers wear; his 
strong double chin bulged over the stiff high collar of 
his jacket; from under his bushy eyebrows his black eyes 
darted fresh and penetrating glances; his onetime tan- 
gled white hair had been combed flat on either side of 
a shining and carefully exact parting. He pitched his 
cap, which bore a gold monogram, probably the badge 
of some bank, in a wide sweep across the whole room on 
to a sofa and with the tail-ends of his jacket thrown back, 
his hands in his trouser pockets, advanced with a grim 
visage towards Gregor. Likely enough he did not him- 
self know what he meant to do; at any rate he lifted his 
feet uncommonly high, and Gregor was dumbfounded 
at the enormous size of his shoe soles. But Gregor could 
not risk standing up to him, aware as he had been from 
the very first day of his new life that his father believed 
only the severest measures suitable for dealing with 
him. And so he ran before his father, stopping when he 
stopped and scuttling forward again when his father 
made any kind of move. In this way they circled the 
room several times without anything decisive happen- 
ing; indeed the whole operation did not even look like 
a pursuit because it was carried out so slowly. And 



6^ THE METAMORPHOSIS 

SO Gregor did not leave the floor, for he feared that his 
father might take as a piece of peculiar wickedness an) 
f.'xcursion of his over the walls or the ceiling. All the 
same, he could not stay this course much longer, for while 
his father took one step he had to carry out a whole 
seres of movements. He was already beginning to feel 
breathless, just as in his former life his lungs had not 
been very dependable. As he was staggering along, try- 
ing to concentrate his energy on running, hardly keeping 
his eyes open; in his dazed state never even thinking of 
any other escape than simply going forward; and having 
almost forgotten that the tvalls rvere free to him, rvhich 
in this room were well provided rvith finely carved pieces 
of furniture full of knobs and crevices — suddenly some- 
thing lightly flung landed close behind him and rolled 
before him. It was an apple; a second apple followed 
immediately; Gregor came to a stop in alarm; there was 
no point in running on, for his father rvas determined 
to bombard him. He had filled his pockets with fruit 
from the dish on the sideboard and was now shying apple 
after apple, without taking particularly good aim for 
the moment. The small red apples rolled about the floor 
as if magnetized and cannoned into each other. An apple 
throrvn without much force grazed Gregor’s back and 
glanced ofif harmlessly. But another following immedi- 
ately landed right on his back and sank in; Gregor 
wanted to drag himself forward, as if this startling, in- 
credible pain could be left behind him; but he felt as 
if nailed to the spot and flattened himself out in a 
complete derangement of all his senses. With his last 
conscious look he saw the door of his room being torn 



THE METAMORPHOSIS 6^ 

open and his mother rushing out ahead of his screaming 
sister, in her underbodice, for her daughter had loosened 
her clothing to let her breathe more freely and recover 
from her swoon, he saw his mother rushing towards his 
father, leaving one after another behind her on the flooi 
her loosened petticoats, stumbling over her petticoats 
straight to his father and embracing him, in complete 
union with him — but here Gregor’s sight began to fail — 
with her hands clasped round his father’s neck as she 
begged for her son’s life. 


Ill 

The serious injury done to Gregor, which disabled 
him for more than a month — the apple went on sticking 
in his body as a visible reminder, since no one ventured 
to remove it — seemed to have made even his father rec- 
ollect that Gregor was a member of the family, despite 
his present unfortunate and repulsive shape, and ought 
not to be treated as an enemy, that, on the contrary, fam- 
ily duty required the suppression of disgust and the ex* 
ercise of patience, nothing but patience. 

And although his injury had impaired probably for- 
ever, his powers of movement, and for • xie time being it 
took him long, long minutes to creep across his room 
like an old invalid — there was no question now of crawl- 
ing up the wall — yet in his own opinion he was suffi* 
ciently compensated for this worsening of his condition 
by the fact that towards evening the living-room dooVi 
which he used to watch intently for an hour or two be- 



66 THE METAMORPHOSIS 

forehand, was always thrown open, so that lying in the 
darkness of his room, invisible to the family, he could 
see them all at the lamp-lit table and listen to their talk, 
by general consent as it were, very different from his 
earlier eavesdropping. 

True, their intercourse lacked the lively character of 
former times, which he had ahvays called to mind with 
a certain wistfulness in the small hotel bedrooms where 
he had been wont to throw himself down, tired out, on 
damp bedding. They were now mostly very silent. Soon 
after supper his father would fall asleep in his arm- 
chair; his mother and sister would admonish each other 
to be silent; his mother, bending low over the lamp, 
stitched at fine sewing for an undenvear firm; his sis- 
ter, who had taken a job as a salesgirl, was learning 
shorthand and French in the evenings on the chance of 
bettering herself. Sometimes his father woke up, and 
as if quite unaware that he had been sleeping said to 
his mother: '‘What a lot of sewing you re doing today!'' 
and at once fell asleep again, while the two women ex- 
changed a tired smile. 

With a kind of mulishness his father persisted in keep- 
ing his uniform on even in the house; his dressing gown 
hung uselessly on its peg and he slept fully dressed 
where he sat, as it he were ready for service at any mo- 
ment and even here only at the beck and call of his 
superior. As a result, his uniform, which was not brand- 
new to start with, began to look dirty, despite all the 
loving care of the mother and sister to keep it clean, and 
Gregor often spent whole evenings gazing at the many 
greasy spots on the garment, gleaming with gold but- 



THE METAMORPHOSIS 


67 

tons always in a high state of polish, in which the old 
man sat sleeping in extreme discomfort and yet quite 
peacefully. 

As soon as the clock struck ten his mother tried to 
rouse his father with gentle words and to persuade him 
after that to get into bed, for sitting there he could not 
have a proper sleep and that was what he needed most, 
since he had to go on duty at six. But with the mulish- 
ness that had obsessed him since he became a bank mes- 
senger he always insisted on staying longer at the table, 
although he regularly fell asleep again and in the end 
only with the greatest trouble could be got out of his 
armchair and into his bed. However insistently Greg- 
or's mother and sister kept urging him with gentle re- 
minders, he would go on slowly shaking his head for a 
quarter of an hour, keeping his eyes shut, and refuse to 
get to his feet. The mother plucked at his sleeve, whis- 
pering endearments in his ear, the sister left her lessons 
to come to her mother’s help, but Gregor’s father was 
not to be caught. He would only sink down deeper in 
his chair. Not until the two women hoisted him up by 
the armpits did he open his eyes and look at them both, 
one after the other, usually with the remark: ‘‘This is 
a life. This £s the peace and quiet of my old age.” And 
leaning on the two of them he would heave himself up, 
with difficulty, as if he were a great burden to him- 
self, suffer them to lead him as far as the door and then 
wave them off and go on alone, while the mother aban- 
doned her needlework and the sister her pen in ordei 
to run after him and help him farther. 

Who could find time, in this overworked and tired- 



68 


THE METAMORPHOSIS 


out family, to bother about Gregor more than was abso- 
lutely needful? The household was reduced more and 
more; the servant girl was turned off; a gigantic bony 
charwoman with white hair flying round her head came 
in morning and evening to do the rough work; every- 
thing else was done by Gregor’s mother, as well as great 
piles of sewing. Even various family ornaments, which 
his mother and sister used to wear with pride at parties 
and celebrations, had to be sold, as Gregor discovered 
of an evening from hearing them all discuss the prices 
obtained. But what they lamented most was the fact 
that they could not leave the flat which was much too 
big for their present circumstances, because they could 
not think of any way to shift Gregor. Yet Gregor saw 
well enough that consideration for him was not the 
main difficulty preventing the removal, for they could 
have easily shifted him in some suitable box with a few 
air holes in it; what really kept them from moving into 
another flat was rather their own complete hopeless- 
ness and the belief that they had been singled out for 
a misfortune such as had never happened to any of 
their relations or acquaintances. They fulfilled to the 
uttermost all that the world demands of poor people: 
the father fetched breakfast for the small clerks In the 
bank, the mother devoted her energy to making under- 
wear for strangers, the sister trotted to and fro behind 
the counter at the behest of customers, but more than 
this they had not the strength to do. And the wound 
in Gregor’s back began to nag at him afresh when 
his mother and sister, after getting his father into bed, 
came back again, left their work lying, drew close to 



THE METAMORPHOSIS 69 

each other and sat cheek by cheek; when his mother, 
pointing towards his room, said: ‘‘Shut that door now, 
Crete,” and he was left again in darkness, while next 
door the women mingled their tears or perhaps sat dry- 
eyed staring at the table. 

Gregor hardly slept at all by night or by day. He 
was often haunted by the idea that next time the door 
opened he would take the family’s affairs in hand again 
just as he used to do; once more, after this long inter- 
val, there appeared in his thoughts the figures of the 
chief and the chief clerk, the commercial travelers and 
the apprentices, the porter who was so dull-witted, two 
or three friends in other firms, a chambermaid in one 
of the rural hotels, a sweet and fleeting memory, a 
cashier in a milliner’s shop, whom he had wooed ear- 
nestly but too slowly — they all appeared, together with 
strangers or people he had quite forgotten, but instead 
of helping him and his family they were one and all 
unapproachable and he was glad when they vanished. 
At other times he would not be in the mood to bother 
about his family, he was only filled with rage at the 
way they were neglecting him, and although he had no 
clear idea of what he might care to eat he would make 
plans for getting into the larder to take the food that 
was after all his due, even if he were not hungry. His 
sister no longer took thought to bring him what might 
especially please him, but in the morning and at noon 
before she went to business hurriedly pushed into his 
room with her foot any food that was available, and in 
the evening cleared it out again with one sweep of the 
broom, heedless of whether it had been merely tasted. 



70 


THE METAMORPHOSIS 


or — as most frequently happened — left untouched. The 
cleaning of his room, which she now did always in 
the evenings, could not have been more hastily done. 
Streaks of dirt stretched along the walls, here and thei'e 
lay balls of dust and filth. At first Gregor used to sta- 
tion himself in some particularly filthy corner when 
his sister arrived, in order to reproach her with it, so 
"•c speak. But he could have sat there for weeks with- 
out getting her to make any impx“ovement; she could 
see the dirt as well as he did, but she had simply made 
up her mind to leave it alone. And yet, %vdth a touchi- 
ness that was new to her, which seemed anyhow to have 
infected the whole family, she jealously guarded her 
claim to be the sole caretaker of Gregor’s room. His 
mother once subjected his room to a thorough clean- 
ing, which was achieved only by means of several buck- 
ets of water — all this dampness of course upset Gregor 
too and he lay widespread, sulky and motionless on the 
sofa — but she was well punished for it. Hardly had his 
sister noticed the changed aspect of his room that eve- 
ning than she rushed in high dudgeon into the living 
room and, despite the imploringly raised hands of her 
mother, burst into a storm of weeping, while her par- 
ents — ^her fatlier had of course been startled out of his 
chair — ^looked on at first in helpless amazement; then 
they too began to go into action; the father reproached 
the mother on his right for not having left the cleaning 
of Gregor’s room to his sister; shrieked at the sister on 
fiis left that never again was she to be allowed to clean 
Gregor’s room; while the mother tried to pull the fa- 
ther into his bedroom, since he was beyond himself 



THE METAMORPHOSIS 


V 

with agitation; the sister, shaken with sobs, then beat 
upon the table with her small fists; and Gregor hissed 
loudly with rage because not one of them thought of 
shutting the door to spare him such a spectacle and so 
much noise. 

Still, even if the sister, exhausted by her daily work, 
had grown tired of looking after Gregor as she did for- 
merly, there was no need for his mother’s intervention 
or for Gregor's being neglected at all. The charwoman 
was there. This old widow, whose strong bony frame 
had enabled her to survive the worst a long life could 
offer, by no means recoiled from Gregor. Without be- 
ing in the least curious she had once by chance opened 
the door of his room and at the sight of Gregor, who, 
taken by surprise, began to rush to and tro although 
no one was chasing him, merely stood there with her 
arms folded. From that time she never failed to open 
his door a little for a moment, morning and evening, 
to have a look at him. At first she even used to call him 
to her, with words which apparently she took to be 
friendly, such as: “Come along, then, you old dung bee- 
tle!” or “Look at the old dung beetle, then!” To such 
allocutions Gregor made no answer, but stayed motion- 
less where he was, as if the door had never been opened. 
Instead of being allowed to disturb him so senselessly 
whenever the whim took her, she should rather have 
been ordered to clean out his room daily, that char- 
woman! Once, early in the morning — heavy rain was 
lashing on the windowpanes, perhaps a sign that spring 
was on the way — Gregor was so exasperated when she 
began addressing him again that he ran at her, as if to 



72 


THE METAMORPHOS..^ 


attack her, although slowly and feebly enough. But the 
charwoman instead of showing fright merely lifted high 
a chair that happened to be beside the door, and as she 
stood there uhth her mciith wide open it was clear that 
she meant to shut it only ^v^hen she brought the chair 
doTvn on Gregor’s back. '‘So you’re not coming any 
nearer?” she asked, as Gregor turned away again, and 
quietly put the chair back into the corner. 

Gregor was now eating hardly anything. Only when 
he happened to pass tlie food laid out for him did he 
take a bit of something in his mouth as a pastime, kept 
it there for an hour at a time and usually spat it out 
again. At first he thought it was chagrin over the state 
of his room that prevented him from eating, yet he 
icon got used to the various changes in his room. It had 
become a habit in the family to push into his room 
diings there was no room for elsewhere, and there were 
plenty of these now, since one of the rooms had been 
let to three lodgers. These serious gentlemen — ^all three 
of them with full beards, as Gregor once observed 
through a crack in the door — had a passion for order, 
not only in their own room but, since they were now 
members of the household, in all its arrangements, es- 
pecially in the kitchen. Superfluous, not to say dirty, 
objects they could not bear. Besides, they had brought* 
with them most of the furnishings they needed. For this 
reason many things could be dispensed with that it was 
no use trying to sell but that should not be thrown away 
either. All of them found their way into Gregor’s room. 
The ash can likewise and the kitchen garbage can. Any- 
thing that was not needed for the moment was simply 



THE METAMORPHOSIS 75 

flung into Gregor’s room by the charwoman, who did 
everything in a hurry; fortunately Gregor usually saw 
only the object, whatever it was, and the hand that held 
it. Perhaps she intended to take the things away again 
as time and opportunity offered, or to collect them un 
dl she could throw them all out in a heap, but in fact 
they just lay wherever she happened to throw them, 
except when Gregor pushed his way through the junl; 
heap and shifted it somewhat, at first out of necessity? 
because he had not room enough to crawl, but later 
with increasing enjoyment, although after such excun 
sions, being sad and weary to death, he would lie mo- 
tionless for hours. And since the lodgers often ate theix 
supper at home in the common living room, the living- 
room door stayed shut many an evening, yet Gregor 
reconciled himself quite easily to the shutting of the 
door, for often enough on evenings when it was opened 
he had disregarded it entirely and lain in the darkest 
corner of his room, quite unnoticed by the family. But 
on one occasion the charwoman left the door open a 
little and it stayed ajar even when the lodgers came in 
for supper and the lamp was lit. They set themselves 
at the top end of the table where formerly Gregor and 
his father and mother had eaten their meals, unfolded 
their napkins and took knife and fork in hand. At once 
his mother appeared in the other doorway with a dish 
of meat and close behind her his sister with a dish of 
potatoes piled high. The food steamed with a thick va- 
por. The lodgers bent over the food set before them as 
if to scrutinize it before eating, in fact the man in the 
niddle, who seemed to pass for an authority with the 



THE METAMORPHOSIS 


74 

other two, cut a piece of meat as it lay on the dish, obvi- 
ously to discover if it were tender or should be sent back 
to the kitchen. He showed satisfaction, and Gregor s 
mother and sister, who had been watching anxious!}, 
breathed freely and began to smile. 

The family itself took its meals in the kitchen. None 
the less, Gregor's father came into the living room 
before going into the kitchen and with one prolonged 
bow, cap in hand, made a round of the table. The 
lodgers all stood up and murmured something in their 
beards. When they were alone again they ate their food 
in almost complete silence. It seemed remarkable to 
Gregor that among the various noises coming from the 
table he could always distinguish the sound of their 
masticating teeth, as if this were a sign to Gregor that 
one needed teeth in order to eat, and that with tooth- 
less jaws even of the finest make one could do noth- 
ing. ‘‘I’m hungry enough,” said Gregor sadly to himself, 
‘but not for that kind of food. How these lodgers are 
stuffing themselves, and here am I dying of starvation!” 

On that very evening — during the whole of his time 
there Gregor could not remember ever having heard 
the violin — the sound of violin-playing came from the 
kitchen. The lodgers had already finished their supper, 
the one in the middle had brought out a newspaper and 
given the other two a page apiece, and now tney were 
leaning back at ease reading and smoking. When the 
nolin began to play they pricked up their ears, got to 
their feet, and went on tiptoe to the hall door where 
they stood huddled together. Their movements must 
have been heard in the kitchen, for Gregor's father 



THE METAMORPHOSIS 75 

called out: ‘Is the violin-playing disturbing you, gen- 
tlemen? It can be stopped at once.” “On the contrary,” 
said the middle lodger, “could not Fraulein Samsa come 
and play in this room, beside us, where it is much more 
convenient and comfortable?” “Oh, certainly,” cried 
Gregor's father, as if he were the violin-player. The 
lodgers came back into the living room and waited. 
Presently Gregor's father arrived with the music stand, 
his mother carrying the music and his sister with the 
violin. His sister quietly made everything ready to start 
playing; his parents, who had never let rooms before 
and so had an exaggerated idea of the courtesy due to 
lodgers, did not venture to sit down on their owp 
chairs; his father leaned against the door, the right 
hand thrust between two buttons of his livery coat, 
which was formally buttoned up; but his mother was 
offered a chair by one of the lodgers and, since she left 
the chair just where he had happened to put it, sat 
down in a corner to one side. 

Gregor’s sister began to play; the father and mother, 
from either side, intently watched the movements of 
her hands. Gregor, attracted by the playing, ventured 
to move forward a little until his head was actually in- 
side the living room. He felt hardly any surprise at his 
growing lack of consideration for the others; there had 
been a time when he prided himself on being consider- 
ate. And yet just on this occasion he had more reason 
than ever to hide himself, since owing to the amount 
of dust which lay thick in his room and rose into the air 
at the slightest movement, he too was covered with dust; 
fiufE and hair and remnants of food trailed with him* 



»/6 THE METAMORPHOSIS 

caught on his back and along his sides; his indifference 
to everything was much too great for him to turn on his 
back and scrape himself clean on the carpet, as once he 
had done several times a day. And in spite of his condi- 
tion, no shame deterred him from advancing a little 
over the spotless floor of the living room. 

To be sure, no one was aware of him. The family 
was entirely absorbed in the violin-playing; the lodgers, 
however, who first of all had stationed themselves, 
hands in pockets, much too close behind the music 
stand so that they could all have read the music, which 
must have bothered his sister, had soon retreated to 
the window, half-whispering with downbent heads, and 
stayed there while his father turned an anxious eye on 
them. Indeed, they were making it more than obvious 
that they had been disappointed in their expectation 
of hearing good or enjoyable violin-playing, that they 
had had more than enough of the performance and only 
out of courtesy suffered a continued disturbance of their 
peace. From the way they all kept blowing the smoke of 
their cigars high in the air through nose and mouth one 
could divine their irritation. And yet Gregor’s sister 
was playing so beautifully. Her face leaned sideways, 
intently and sadly her eyes followed the notes of music. 
Gregor crawled a little farther forward and lowered his 
head to the ground so that it might be possible for his 
eyes to meet hers. Was he an animal, that music had 
such an effect upon him? He felt as if the way were open- 
ing before him to the unknown nourishment he craved. 
He was determined to push forward till he reached his 
sister, to pull at her skirt and so let her know that she 



THE METAMORPHOSIS 77 

was to come into his room with her violin, for no one 
here appreciated her playing as he would appreciate it. 
He would never let her out of his room, at least, not so 
long as he lived; his frightful appearance would become^ 
for the first time, useful to him; he would watch all the 
doors of his room at once and spit at intruders; but his 
sister should need no constraint, she should stay with 
him of her own free will; she should sit beside him on 
the sofa, bend down her ear to him and hear him con- 
fide that he had had the firm intention of sending hei 
to the Conservatorium, and that, but for his mishap, last 
Christmas — surely Christmas was long past? — ^he would 
have announced it to everybody without allowing a sin- 
gle objection. After this confession his sister would be 
so touched that she would burst into tears, and Gregor 
would then raise himself to her shoulder and kiss her 
on the neck, which, now that she went to business, she 
kept free of any ribbon or collar. 

“Mr. Samsa!” cried the middle lodger, to Gregor's 
father, and pointed, without wasting any more words, 
at Gregor, now working himself slowly forwards. The 
violin fell silent, the middle lodger first smiled to his 
friends with a shake of the head and then looked a,^ 
Gregor again. Instead of driving Gregor out, his fathet 
seemed to think it more needful to begin by soothing 
down the lodgers, although they were not at all agi- 
tated and apparently found Gregor more entertaining 
than the violin-playing. He hurried towards them and, 
spreading out his arms, tried to urge them back into 
their own room and at the same time to block their 
view of Gregor. They now began to be really a little 



78 THE METAMORPHOSIS 

angry, one could not tell whether because of the old 
man’s behavior or because it had just dawned on them 
that all unwittingly they had such a neighbor as Gregor 
next door. They demanded explanations of his father, 
they waved their arms like him, tugged uneasily at their 
beards, and only with reluctance backed towards their 
room. Meanwhile Gregor s sister, who stood there as if 
lost when her playing was so abruptly broken oflE, came 
to life again, pulled herself together all at once after 
standing for a while holding violin and bow in nerve- 
lessly hanging hands and staring at her music, pushed 
her violin into the lap of her mother, who was still sit- 
ting in her chair fighting asthmatically for breath, and 
ran into the lodgers’ room to which they were now be- 
ing shepherded by her father rather more quickly than 
before. One could see the pillows and blankets on the 
beds flying under her accustomed fingers and being laid 
in order. Before the lodgers had actually reached their 
room she had finished making the beds and slipped out. 

The old man seemed once more to be so possessed by 
his mulish self-assertiveness that he was forgetting all 
the respect he should show to his lodgers. He kept driv- 
ing them on and driving them on until in the very door 
of the bedroom the middle lodger stamped his foot 
loudly on the floor and so brought him to a halt. “I 
beg to announce,” said the lodger, lifting one hand and 
looking also at Gregor’s mother and sister, ''that because 
of the disgusting conditions prevailing in this house- 
hold and family” — ^here he spat on the floor with 
emphatic brevity — "I give you notice on the spot. Natu- 
rally I won’t pay you a penny for the days I have lived 



THE METAMORPHOSIS 79 

here; on the contrary I shall consider bringing an action 
for damages against you, based on claims — believe me — 
that will be easily susceptible of proof.” He ceased and 
stared straight in front of him, as if he expected some- 
thing. In fact his two friends at once rushed into the 
breach with these words: ‘‘And we too give notice on 
the spot.” On that he seized the door-handle and shut 
the door with a slam. 

Gregor’s father, groping with his hands, staggered 
forward and fell into his chair; it looked as if he were 
stretching himself there for his ordinary evening nap, 
but the marked jerkings of his head, which was as if 
uncontrollable, showed that he was far from asleep. 
Gregor had simply stayed quietly all the time on the 
spot where the lodgers had espied him. Disappointment 
at the failure of his plan, perhaps also the weakness aris- 
ing from extreme hunger, made it impossible for him 
to move. He feared, with a fair degree of certainty, that 
at any moment the general tension would discharge it 
self in a combined attack upon him, and he lay waiting. 
He did not react even to the noise made by the violin 
as it fell off his mother’s lap from under her trembling 
fingers and gave out a resonant note. 

“My dear parents,” said his sister, slapping her hand 
on the table by way of introduction, “things can’t go on 
like this. Perhaps you don’t realize that, but I do. I 
won’t utter my brother’s name in the presence of this 
creature, and so all I say is: we must try to get rid of it. 
We’ve tried to look after it and to put up with it as far 
as is humanly possible, and I don’t think anyone could 
reproach us in the slightest.” 



8o 


THE METAMORPHOSIS 


‘‘She is more than right/' said Gregor's father to him- 
self. His mother, who was still choking for lack of 
breath, began to cough hollowly into her hand with a 
wild look in her eyes. 

His sister rushed over to her and held her forehead. 
His father’s thoughts seemed to have lost their vague- 
ness at Crete’s words; he sat more upright, fingering his 
service cap that lay among the plates still lying on the 
table from the lodgers’ supper, and from time to time 
looked at the still form of Gregor. 

“We must try to get rid of it,” his sister now said ex- 
plicitly to her father, since her mother was coughing too 
much to hear a word. “It will be the death of both of 
you, I can see that coming. When one has to work as 
hard as we do, all of us, one can’t stand this continual 
torment at home on top of it. At least I can’t stand it 
any longer.” And she burst into such a passion of sob- 
bing that her tears dropped on her mother’s face, where 
she wiped them off mechanically. 

“My dear,” said the old man sympathetically, and 
with evident understanding, “but what can we do?” 

Gregor’s sister merely shrugged her shoulders to in- 
dicate the feeling of helplessness that had now over- 
mastered her during her weeping fit, in contrast to her 
former confidence. 

“If he could understand us,” said her father, half 
questioningly; Crete, still sobbing, vehemently waved 
a hand to show how unthinkable that was. 

“If he could understand us,” repeated the old man, 
shutting his eyes to consider his daughter’s conviction 
that understanding was impossible, “then perhans we 



THE METAMORPHOSIS 


8i 


might come to some agreement with him. hut as it is — ” 
‘‘He must go,” cried Gregor’s sister, “that’s the only 
solution. Father. You must just try to get rid of the idea 
that this is Gregor. The fact that we’ve believed it for 
so long is the root of all our trouble. But how can it be 
Gregor? If this were Gregor, he would have realized 
long ago that human beings can’t live with such a crea 
ture, and he’d have gone away on his own accord. Then 
we wouldn’t have any brother, but we’d be able to go 
on living and Keep his memory in honor. As it is, this 
creature persecutes us, drives away our lodgers, obvi- 
ously wants the whole apartment to himself and would 
have us all sleep in the gutter. Just look. Father,” she 
shrieked all at once, “he’s at it again!” And in an access 
of panic that was quite incomprehensible to Gregor she 
even quitted her mother, literally thrusting the chair 
from her as if she would rather sacrifice her mother 
than stay so near to Gregor, and rushed behind her fa- 
ther, who also rose up, being simply upset by her agita- 
tion, and half-spread his arms out as if to protect her. 

Yet Gregor had not the slightest intention of fright- 
ening anyone, far less his sister. He had only begun te 
turn round in order to crawl back to his room, but it 
was certainly a startling operation to watch, since be- 
cause of his disabled condition he could not execute the 
difficult turning movements except by lifting his head 
and then bracing it against the floor over and over 
again. He paused and looked round. His good intentions 
seemed to have been recognized; the alarm had only 
been momentary. Now they were all watching him in 
melancholy silence. His mother lay in her chair, her 



82 THE METAMORPHOSIS 

legs Stiffly outstretched and pressed together, her eyes 
almost closing for sheer weariness; his father and his 
sister were sitting beside each other, his sister*s arm 
around the old man’s neck. 

Perhaps I can go on turning round now, thought 
Gregor, and began his labors again. He could not stop 
himself from panting with the effort, and had to pause 
now and then to take breath. Nor did anyone harass 
him; he was left entirely to himself. When he had com- 
pleted the turn-round he began at once to crawl straight 
back. He was amazed at the distance separating him 
from his room and could not understand how in his 
weak state he had managed to accomplish the same jour- 
ney so recently, almost without remarking it. Intent on 
crawling as fast as possible, he barely noticed that not a 
single word, not an ejaculation from his family, inter- 
fered with his progress. Only when he was already in 
the doorway did he turn his head round, not completely, 
for his neck muscles were getting stiff, but enough to see 
that nothing had changed behind him except that his 
sister had risen to her feet. His last glance fell on his 
mother, who was not quite overcome by sleep. 

Hardly was he well inside his room when the door 
was hastily pushed shut, bolted and locked. The sud- 
den noise in his rear startled him so much that his little 
legs gave beneath him. It was his sister who had shown 
such haste. She had been standing ready waiting and 
had made a light spring forward. Gregor had not even 
heard her coming, and she cried “At lastP' to her par- 
ents as she turned the key in the lock. 

'*And what now?” said Gregor to himself, looking 



THE METAMORPHOSIS Sj 

round in the darkness. Soon he made the discovery that 
he was now unable to stir a limb. This did not surprise 
him, rather it seemed unnatural that he should ever ac- 
tually have been able to move on these feeble little 
legs. Otherwise he felt relatively comfortable. True, his 
whole body was aching, but it seemed that the pain 
was gradually growing less and would finally pass away. 
The rotting apple in his back and the inflamed area 
around it. all covered with soft dust, already hardly 
troubled him. He thought of his family with tenderness 
and love. The decision that he must disappear was one 
that he held to even more strongly than his sister, if that 
were possible. In this state of vacant and peaceful medi- 
tation he remained until the tower clock struck three in 
the morning. The first broadening of light in the world 
outside the window entered his consciousness once more. 
Then his head sank to the floor of its own accord and 
from his nostrils came the last faint flicker of his breath. 

When the charwoman arrived early in the morning 
— what between her strength and her impatience she 
slammed all the doors so loudly, never mind how often 
she had been begged not to do so, that no one in the 
whole apartment could enjoy any quiet sleep after her 
arrival — she noticed nothing unusual as she took her 
customary peep into Gregor’s room. She thought he was 
lying motionless on purpose, pretending to be in the 
sulks; she credited him with every kind of intelligence. 
Since she happened to have the long-handled broom in 
her hand she tried to tickle him up with it from the 
doorway. When that too produced no reaction she felt 
provoked and poked at him a little harder, and only 



84 the metamorphosis 

when she had pushed him along the floor without meet- 
ing any resistance was her attention aroused. It did not 
take her long to establish the truth of the matter, and 
her eyes widened, she let out a whistle, yet did not waste 
much time over it but tore open the door of the Samsas’ 
bedroom and yelled into the darkness at the top of her 
voice: ''Just look at this, it’s dead; it’s lying here dead 
and done for!” 

Mr. and Mrs. Samsa started up in their double bed 
and before they realized the nature of the charwoman’s 
announcement had some difficulty in overcoming the 
shock ot it. But then they got out of bed quickly, one 
on either side, Mr. Samsa throwing a blanket over his 
shoulders, Mrs. Samsa in nothing but her nightgown; 
in this array they entered Gregor’s room. Meanwhile 
the door of the living room opened, too, where Crete 
had been sleeping since the advent of the lodgers; she 
was completely dressed as if she had not been to bed, 
which seemed to be confirmed also by the paleness of 
her face. "Dead?” said Mrs. Samsa, looking question- 
ingly at the charwoman, although she could have in- 
vestigated for herself, and the fact was obvious enough 
without investigation. “I should say so,” said the char- 
woman, proving her words by pushing Gregor’s corpse 
a long way to one side with her broomstick. Mrs. Samsa 
made a movement as if to stop her, but checked it. 
"Well,” said Mr. Samsa, "now thanks be to God.” He 
crossed himself, and the three women followed his ex- 
ample, Crete, whose eyes never left the corpse, said: 
"Just see how thin he was. It’s such a long time since he’s 
eaten anything. The food came out again just as it went 



THE METAMORPHOSIS 


85 

in.’’ Indeed, Gregor’s body was completely fiat and dry, 
as could only now be seen when it was no longer 
supported by the legs and nothing prevented one from 
looking closely at it. 

‘‘Come in beside us, Crete, for a little while,” said 
Mrs. Samsa with a tremulous smile, and Crete, not with- 
out looking back at the corpse, followed her parents 
into their bedroom. The charwoman shut the door and 
opened the window wide. Although it was so early in 
the morning a certain softness was perceptible in the 
fresh air. After all, it was already the end of March. 

The three lodgers emerged from their room and were 
surprised to see no breakfast; they had been forgotten. 
“Where’s our breakfast?” said the middle lodger pee- 
vishly to the charwoman. But she put her finger to her 
lips and hastily, without a word, indicated by gestures 
that they should go into Gregor’s room. They did so 
and stood, their hands in the pockets of their somewhat 
shabby coats, around Gregor’s corpse in the room where 
it was now fully light. 

At that the door of the Samsas’ bedroom opened and 
Mr. Samsa appeared in his uniform, his wife on one 
arm, his daughter on the other. They all looked a little 
as if they had been crying; from time to time Crete hid 
her face on her father’s arm. 

“Leave my house at once!” said Mr. Samsa, and 
pointed to the door without disengaging himself from 
the women. ''What do you mean by that?” said the mid- 
dle lodger, taken somewhat aback, with a feeble smile. 
The two others put their hands behind them and kept 
rubbing them together, as if in gleeful expectation of a 



86 


THE METAMORPHOSIS 


fine set-to in which they were bound to come off the win- 
ners. '1 mean just what I say/' answered Mr. Samsa, and 
advanced in a straight line with his two companions to 
wards the lodger. He stood his ground at first quietly, 
looking at the floor as if his thoughts were taking a new 
pattern in his head. “Then let us go, by all means,” he 
said, and looked up at Mr. Samsa as if in a sudden ac- 
cess of humility he were expecting some renewed sanc- 
tion for this decision Mr. Samsa merely nodded briefly 
once or twice with meaningful eyes. Upon that the 
lodger really did go with long strides into the hall, his 
two friends had been listening and had quite stopped 
rubbing their hands for some moments and now went 
scuttling after him as if afraid that Mr. Samsa might get 
into the hall before them and cut them off from their 
leader In the hall they all three took their hats from the 
tack, their sticks from the umbrella stand, bowed in si- 
lence and quitted the apartment. With a suspiciousness 
which proved quite unfounded Mr. Samsa and the two 
women followed them out to the landing; leaning over 
the banister they watched the three figures slowly but 
surely going down the long stairs, vanishing from sight 
at a certain turn of the staircase on every floor and com- 
ing into view again after a moment or so; the more they 
dwindled, the more the Samsa family's interest in them 
dwindled, and when a butchers boy met them and 
passed them on the stairs coming up proudly with a tray 
on his head, Mr. Samsa and the two women soon left the 
landing and as if a burden had been lifted from them 
went back into their apartment. 

They decided to spend this day in resting and going 



THE METAMORPHOSIS 87 

for a stroll; they had not only deserved such a respite 
from work, but absolutely needed it. And so they sat 
down at the table and wrote three notes of excuse, Mr. 
Samsa to his board of management, Mrs. Samsa to her 
employer and Crete to the head of her firm. While they 
were writing, the charwoman came in to say that she 
was going now, since her morning’s work was finished. 
At first they only nodded without looking up, but as she 
kept hovering there they eyed her irritably. '‘Well?” 
said Mr. Samsa. The charwoman stood grinning in the 
doorway as if she had good news to impart to the fam- 
ily but meant not to say a word unless properly ques- 
tioned. The small ostrich feather standing upright on 
her hat, which had annoyed Mr. Samsa ever since she 
was engaged, was waving gaily in all directions. “Well, 
what is it then?” asked Mrs. Samsa, who obtained more 
respect from the charwoman than the others. “Oh,” said 
the charwoman, giggling so amiably that she could not 
at once continue, “just this, you don’t need to bother 
about how to get rid of the thing next door. It’s been 
seen to already.” Mrs. Samsa and Crete bent over their 
letters again, as if preoccupied; Mr. Samsa, who per- 
ceived that she was eager to begin describing it all in 
detail, stopped her with a decisive hand. But since she 
was not allowed to tell her story, she remembered the 
great hurry she was in, being obviously deeply huffed: 
“Bye, everybody,” she said, whirling off violently, and 
departed with a frightful slamming of doors. 

“She’ll be given notice tonight,” said Mr. Samsa, but 
neither from his wife nor his daughter did he get any 
answer, for the charwoman seemed to have shattered 



88 THE METAMORPHOSIS 

again the composure they had barely achieved. They 
rose, went to the window and stayed there, clasping each 
other tight. Mr. Samsa turned in his chair to look at 
them and quietly observed them for a little. Then he 
called out: “Come along, now, do. Let bygones be by- 
gones. And you might have some consideration for me.” 
The two of them complied at once, hastened to him, 
caressed him and quickly finished their letters. 

Then they all three left the apartment together, 
which was more than they had done for months, and 
went by tram into the open country outside the town. 
The tram, in which they were the only passengers, was 
filled with warm sunshine. Leaning comfortably back 
in their seats they canvassed their prospects for the fu- 
ture, and it appeared on closer inspection that these 
were not at all bad, for the jobs they had got, which 
so far they had never really discussed with each other, 
were all three admirable and likely to lead to better 
things later on. The greatest immediate improvement 
in their condition would of course arise from moving 
to another house; they wanted to take a smaller and 
cheaper but also better situated and more easily run 
apartment than the one they had, which Gregor had 
selected. While they were thus conversing, it struck 
both Mr. and Mrs. Samsa, almost at the same moment, 
as they became aware of their daughter's increasing vi- 
vacity, that in spite of all the sorrow of recent times, 
which had made her cheeks pale, she had bloomed into 
a pretty girl with a good figure. They grew quieter and 
half unconsciously exchanged glances of complete agree- 
ment, having come to the conclusion that it would soon 



THE METAMORPHOSIS 89 

be time to find a good husband for her. And it was like 
a confirmation of their new dreams and excellent intern 
tions that at the end of their journey their daughter 
sprang te her feet first and stretched her young body. 



In the Penal Colony 


‘It’s a remarkable piece of apparatus,” said the offi- 
cer to the explorer and surveyed with a certain air of 
admiration the apparatus which was after all quite fa- 
miliar to him. The explorer seemed to have accepted 
merely out of politeness the Commandant’s invitation 
to witness the execution of a soldier condemned to death 
for disobedience and insulting behavior to a superior. 
Nor did the colony itself betray much interest in this 
execution. At least, in the small sandy valley, a deep hol- 
low surrounded on all sides by naked crags, there was 
no one present save the officer, the explorer, the con- 
demned man, who was a stupid-looking wide-mouthed 
creature with bewildered hair and face, and the soldier 
who held the heavy chain controlling the spiall chains 
locked on the prisoner’s ankles, wrists and neck, chains 
which were themselves attached to each other by com- 
municating links. In any case, the condemned man 
looked so like a submissive dog that one might have 
thought he could be left to run free on the surrounding 
hills and would only need to be whistled for when the 
execution was due to begin. 

The explorer did not much care about the apparatus 


90 



IN iHE PENAL COLONY 91 

and walked up and doi\Ti behind the prisoner with al- 
most visible indifference while the officer made the last 
adjustments, now creeping beneath the structure, which 
was bedded deep in the earth, now climbing a ladder 
to inspect its upper parts. These were tasks that might 
well have been left to a mechanic, but the officer per- 
formed them with great zeal, whether because he was 
a devoted admirer of the apparatus or because of other 
reasons the work could be entrusted to no one else. 
“Ready now!” he called at last and climbed down from 
the ladder. He looked uncommonly limp, breathed with 
his mouth wide open and had tucked two fine ladies’ 
handkerchiefs under the collar of his uniform. “These 
uniforms are too heavy for the tropics, surely,” said the 
explorer, instead of making some inquiry about the ap- 
paratus, as the officer had expected. “Of course,” said 
the officer, washing his oily and greasy hands in a bucket 
of water that stood ready, “but they mean home to us; 
we don’t want to forget about home. Now just have a 
look at this machine,” he added at once, simultaneously 
drying his hands on a towel and indicating the appara- 
tus. “Up till now a few things still had to be set by hand, 
but from this moment it works all by itself.” The ex- 
plorer nodded and followed him. The officer, anxious 
to secure himself against all contingencies, said: “Things 
sometimes go wrong, of course; I hope that nothing goes 
wrong today, but we have to allow for the possibility. 
The machinery should go on working continuously for 
twelve hours. But if anything does go wrong it will only 
be some small matter that can be set right at once. 

“Won’t you take a seat?” he asked finally, drawing a 



IN THE PENAL COLONY 


92 

cane chair out from among a heap of them and offering 
it to the explorer, who could not refuse it. He was now 
sitting at the edge of a pit, into which he glanced for a 
fleeting moment. It was not very deep. On one side of 
the pit the excavated soil had been piled up in a ram- 
part, on the other side of it stood the apparatus. ‘‘I don't 
know," said the officer, “if the Commandant has al- 
ready explained this apparatus to you." The explorer 
waved one hand vaguely; the officer asked for nothing 
better, since now he could explai i the apparatus him- 
self, “This apparatus," he said, taking hold of a crank 
handle and leaning against it, “was invented by our for- 
mer Commandant. I assisted at the very earliest experi- 
ments and had a share in all the work until its comple- 
tion. But the credit of inventing it belongs to him alone. 
Have you ever heard of our former Commandant? No? 
Well, it isn’t saying too much if I tell you that the or- 
ganization of the whole penal colony is his work. We who 
were his friends knew even before he died that the or- 
ganization of the colony was so perfect that his successor, 
even with a thousand new schemes in his head, would 
find it impossible to alter anything, at least for many 
years to come. And our prophecy has come true; the new 
Commandant has had to acknowledge its truth. A pity 
you never met the old Commandant! — But," the officer 
interrupted himself, “I am rambling on, and here stands 
his apparatus before us. It consists, as you see, of three 
parts. In the course of time each of these parts has ac- 
quired a kind of popular nickname. The lower one is 
called the 'Bed,’ the upper one the 'Designer,’ and this 
one here in the middle that moves up and down is called 



IN THE PENAL COLONY 93 

the ‘Harrow,* ** “The Harrow?’* asked the explorer. He 
had not been listening very attentively, the glare of the 
sun in the shadeless valley was altogether too strong, it 
was difficult to collect one’s thoughts. All the more did 
he admire the officer, who in spite of his tight-fitting full- 
dress uniform coat, amply befrogged and weighed down 
by epaulettes, was pursuing his subject with such enthu- 
siasm and, besides talking, was still tightening a screw 
here and there with a spanner. As for the soldier, he 
seemed to be in much the same condition as the ex- 
plorer. He had wound the prisoner’s chain round both 
his wrists, propped himself on his rifle, let his head hang 
and was paying no attention to anything. That did 
not surprise the explorer, for the officer was speaking 
French, and certainly neither the soldier nor the pris- 
oner understood a word of French. It was all the more 
remarkable, therefore, that the prisoner was none the 
less making an effort to follow the officer’s explanations. 
With a kind of drowsy persistence he directed his gaze 
wherever the officer pointed a finger, and at the inter- 
ruption of the explorer’s question he, too, as well as the 
officer, looked round, 

“Yes, the Harrow,” said the officer, “a good name for 
it. The needles are set in like the teeth of a harrow 
and the whole thing works something like a harrow, al- 
though its action is limited to one place and contrived 
with much more artistic skill. Anyhow, you’ll soon un- 
derstand it. On the Bed here the condemned man is laid 
— I’m going to describe the apparatus first before I set it 
in motion. Then you’ll be able to follow the proceedings 
better. Besides, one of the cogwheels in the Designer is 



IN THE PENAL COLONY 


94 

badly worn; it creaks a lot when it’s working, you can 
hardly hear yourself speak; spare parts, unfortunately, 
are difficult to get here. — ^Well, here is the Bed, as I told 
you. It is completely covered with a layer of cotton 
wool; you’ll find out why later. On this cotton wool the 
condemned man is laid, face down, quite naked, of 
course; here are straps for the hands, here for the feet, 
and here for the neck, to bind him fast. Here at the head 
of the bed, where the man, as I said, first lays dowm his 
face, is this little gag of felt, which can be easily regu- 
lated to go straight into his mouth. It is meant to keep 
him from screaming and biting his tongue. Of course 
the man is forced to take the felt into his mouth, for 
otherwise his neck would be broken by the strap.” ‘‘Is 
that cotton wool?” asked the explorer, bending forward. 
“Yes, certainly,” said the officer, with a smile. “Feel it for 
yourself.” He took the explorer’s hand and guided it 
over the bed. “It’s specially prepared cotton wool; that’s 
why it looks so different; I’ll tell you presently what it’s 
for.” The explorer already felt a dawning interest in 
the apparatus; he sheltered his eyes from the sun with 
one hand and gazed up at the structure. It was a huge 
affair. The Bed and the Designer were of the same size 
and looked like two dark wooden chests. The Designer 
hung about two meters above the Bed; each of them was 
bound at the corners with four rods of brass that almost 
flashed out rays in the sunlight. Between the chests shut- 
tled the Harrow on a ribbon of steel. 

The officer had scarcely noticed the explorer’s pre- 
vious indifference, but he was now well aware of his 
dawning interest; so he stopped explaining in order to 



IN THE PENAL COLONY 95 

leave a space of time for quiet observation. The con- 
demned man imitated the explorer; since he could not 
use a hand to shelter his eyes he gazed upwards without 
shade. 

“Well, the man lies down,” said the explorer, leaning 
back in his chair and crossing his legs. 

“Yes,” said the officer, pushing his cap back a little 
and passing one hand over his heated face, “now listen! 
Both the Bed and the Designer have an electric battery 
each; the Bed needs one for itself, the Designer for the 
Harrow. As soon as the man is strapped down, the Bed 
is set in motion. It quivers in minute, very rapid vibra- 
tions, both from side to side and up and down. You will 
have seen similar apparatus in hospitals; but in our Bed 
the movements are all precisely calculated; you see, they 
have to correspond very exactly to the movements of the 
Harrow. And the Harrow is the instrument for the 
actual execution of the sentence.” 

“And how does the sentence run?” asked the explorer. 

“You don’t know that either?” said the officer in 
amazement, and bit his lips. “Forgive me if my explana* 
dons seem rather incoherent. I do beg your pardon. You 
see, the Commandant always used to do the explaining; 
but the new Commandant shirks this duty; yet that such 
an important visitor” — the explorer tried to deprecate 
the honor with both hands; the officer, however, insisted 
— “that such an important visitor should not even be 
told about the kind of sentence we pass is a new develop- 
ment, which — '' He was just on the point of using strong 
language but checked himself and said only: “I was not; 
informed, it is not my fault. In any case, I am certainly 



IN THE PENAL COLONY 


the best person to explain our procedure, since I have 
here’’ — he patted his breast pocket — '‘the relevant draw- 
ings made by our former Commandant.” 

“The Commandant’s own drawings?” asked the ex- 
plorer. “Did he combine everything in himself, then? 
Was he soldier, judge, mechanic, chemist and draughts- 
man?” 

“Indeed he was,” said the officer, nodding assent, with 
a remote, glassy look. Then he inspected his hands criti- 
cally; they did not seem clean enough to him for touch- 
ing the drawings; so he went over to the bucket and 
washed them again. Then he drew out a small leather 
wallet and said: “Our sentence does not sound severe. 
Whatever commandment the prisoner has disobeyed is 
written upon his body by the Harrow. This prisoner, 
for instance” — the officer indicated the man — “will have 
written on his body: honor thy superiors!” 

The explorer glanced at the man; he stood, as the 
officer pointed him out, with bent head, apparently lis- 
tening with all his ears in an eiffort to catch what was be- 
ing said. Yet the movement of his blubber lips, closely 
pressed together, showed clearly that he could not un- 
derstand a word. Many questions were troubling the 
explorer, but at the sight of the prisoner he asked only: 
“Does he know his sentence?” “No,” said the officer, 
eager to go on with his exposition, but the explorer in- 
terrupted him: “He doesn’t know the sentence that has 
been passed on him?” “No,” said the officer again, paus- 
ing a moment as if to let the explorer elaborate his ques- 
tion, and then said: “There would be no point in telling 
him. He’ll learn it on his body.” The explorer intended 



IN THE PENAL COLONY 


97 

to make no answer, but he felt the prisoner’s gaze turned 
on him; it seemed to ask if he approved such goings on. 
So he bent forward again, having already leaned back 
in his chair, and put another question: "'But surely he 
knows that he has been sentenced?” ''Nor that either,” 
said the officer, smiling at the explorer as if expecting 
him to make further surprising remarks. "No,” said 
the explorer, wiping his forehead, "then he can’t know 
either whether his defense was effective?” "He has had 
no chance of putting up a defense,” said the officer, turn* 
ing his eyes away as if speaking to himself and so sparing 
the explorer the shame of hearing selhevident matters 
explained. "But he must have had some chance of de- 
fending himself,” said the explorer, and rose from his 
seat 

The officer realized that he was in danger of having 
his exposition of the apparatus held up for a long time; 
so he went up to the explorer, took him by the arm, 
waved a hand towards the condemned man, who was 
standing very straight now that he had so obviously be- 
come the center of attention — the soldier had also given 
the chain a jerk — ^and said: "This is how the matter 
stands. I have been appointed judge in this penal colony. 
Despite my youth. For I was the former Commandant’s 
assistant in all penal matters and know more about the 
apparatus than anyone. My guiding principle is this: 
Guilt is never to be doubted. Other courts cannot follow 
that principle, for they consist of several opinions and 
have higher courts to scrutinize them. That is not the 
case here, or at least, it was not the case in the former 
Commandant’s time. The new man has certainly shown 



98 IN THE PENAL COLONY 

some inclination to interfere with my judgments, but 
so far I have succeeded in fending him off and will go 
on succeeding. You wanted to have the case explained; 
it is quite simple, like all of them. A captain reported 
to me this morning that this man, who had been assigned 
to him as a servant and sleeps before his door, had been 
asleep on duty. It is his duty, you see, to get up every 
time the hour strikes and salute the captain’s door. Not 
an exacting duty, and very necessary, since he has to be 
a sentry as well as a servant, and must be alert in both 
functions. Last night the captain wanted to see if the 
man was doing his duty. He opened the door as the clock 
struck two and there was his man curled up asleep. He 
took his riding whip and lashed him across the face. In- 
stead of getting up and begging pardon, the man caught 
hold of his master’s legs, shook him and cried: 'Throw 
that whip away or I’ll eat you alive.’ — That’s the evi- 
dence. The captain came to me an hour ago, I wrote 
down his statement and appended the sentence to it. 
Then I had the man put in chains. That was all quite 
simple. If I had first called the man before me and in- 
terrogated him, things would have got into a confused 
tangle. He would have told lies, and had I exposed these 
lies he would have backed them up with more lies, and 
so on and so forth. As it is, I’ve got him and I won’t 
let him go. — Is that quite clear now? But we’re wasting 
time, the execution should be beginning and I haven’t 
finished explaining the apparatus yet.” He pressed the 
explorer back into his chair, went up again to the appa- 
ratus and began: "As you see, the shape of the Harrow 
corresponds to the human form; here is the harrow for 



IN THE PENAL COLONY 99 

the torso, here are the harrows for the legs. For the head 
there is only this one small spike. Is that quite clear?” 
He bent amiably forward towards the explorer, eager 
to provide the most comprehensive explanations. 

The explorer considered the Harrow with a frown. 
The explanation of the judicial procedure had not satis- 
fied him. He had to remind himself that this was in any 
case a penal colony where extraordinary measures were 
needed and that military discipline must be enforced to 
the last. He also felt that some hope might be set on 
the new Commandant, who was apparently of a mind 
to bring in, although gradually, a new kind of procedure 
which the officer’s narrow mind was incapable of un- 
derstanding. This train of thought prompted his next 
question: “Will the Commandant attend the execu- 
tion?” “It is not certain,” said the officer, wincing at the 
direct question, and his friendly expression darkened. 
“That is just why we have to lose no time. Much as I 
dislike it, I shall have to cut' my explanations short. 
But of course tomorrow, when the apparatus has been 
cleaned — its one drawback is that it gets so messy — I can 
recapitulate all the details. For the present, then, only 
the essentials. — ^When the man lies down on the Bed and 
it begins to vibrate, the Harrow is lowered onto his 
body. It regulates itself automatically so that the nee- 
dles barely touch his skin; once contact is made the steel 
ribbon stiffens immediately into a rigid band. And then 
the performance begins. An ignorant onlooker would 
see no difference between one punishment and another. 
The Harrow appears to do its work with uniform regu- 
larity. As it quivers, its points pierce the skin of the bod^ 



lOO IN THE PENAL COLONY 

which is itself quivering from the vibration of the 
Bed. So that the actual progress of the sentence can be 
watched, the Harrow is made of glass. Getting the nee- 
dles fixed in the glass was a technical problem, but after 
many experiments we overcame the difficulty. No trou- 
ble was too great for us to take, you see. And now anyone 
can look through the glass and watch the inscription 
taking form on the body. Wouldn’t you care to come a 
little nearer and have a look at the needles?” 

The explorer got up slowly, walked across and bent 
over the Harrow. 'Tou see,” said the officer, “there are 
two kinds of needles arranged in multiple patterns. 
Each long needle has a short one beside it. The long 
needle does the writing, and the short needle sprays a 
jet of water to wash away the blood and keep the in- 
scription clear. Blood and water together are then con- 
ducted here through small runnels into this main runnel 
and down a waste pipe into the pit.” With his finger the 
officer traced the exact course taken by the blood and 
water. To make the picture as vivid as possible he held 
both hands below the outlet of the waste pipe as if to 
catch the outflow, and when he did this the explorer 
drew back his head and feeling behind him with one 
hand sought to return to his chair. To his horror he 
found that the condemned man too had obeyed the of- 
ficer’s invitation to examine the Harrow at close quar- 
ters and had followed him. He had pulled forward the 
sleepy soldier with the chain and was bending over the 
glass. One could see that his uncertain eyes were trying 
to perceive what the two gentlemen had been looking 
at. but since he had not understood the explanation he 



IN THE PENAL COLONY lO’l 

could not make head or tail of it. He was peering this 
way and that way. He kept running his eyes along the 
glass. The explorer wanted to drive him away, sinct' 
what he was doing was probably culpable. But the offi 
cer firmly restrained the explorer with one hand and 
with the other took a clod of earth from the rampart 
and threw it at the soldier. He opened his eyes with a 
jerk, saw what the condemned man had dared to do, let 
his rifle fall, dug his heels into the ground, dragged his 
prisoner back so that he stumbled and fell immediately, 
and then stood looking down at him, watching him 
struggling and rattling in his chains. ''Set him on his 
feet!’' yelled the officer, for he noticed that the ex- 
plorer’s attention was being too much distracted by the 
prisoner. In fact he was even leaning right across the 
Harrow, without taking any notice of it, intent only on 
finding out what was happening to the prisoner. "Be 
careful with him!” cried the officer again. He ran round 
the apparatus, himself caught the condemned man un- 
der the shoulders and with the soldier’s help got him up 
on his feet, which kept slithering from under him. 

"Now I know all about it,” said the explorer as the 
officer came back to him. "All except the most impor- 
tant thing,” he answered, seizing the explorer’s arm and 
pointing upwards: "In the Designer are all the cog- 
wheels that tontrol the movements of the Harrow, and 
this machinery is regulated according to the inscription 
demanded by the sentence. I am still using the guiding 
plans drawn by the former Commandant. Here they 
are” — he exti^acted some sheets from the leather wallet 
— “but I’m sorry I can’t let you handle them; they ar-n 



102 


IN THE PENAL COLONY 


my most precious possessions. Just take a seat and Til 
hold them in front of you like this, then you’ll be able 
to see everything quite well.” He spread out the first 
sheet of paper. The explorer would have liked to say 
something appreciative, but all he could see was a laby- 
rinth of lines crossing and re-crossing each other, which 
covered the paper so thickly that it was difficult to dis- 
cern the blank spaces between them. “Read it,” said 
the officer. “I can’t,” said the explorer. “Yet it’s clear 
enough,” said the officer. “It’s very ingenious,” said the 
explorer evasively, “but I can’t make it out.” “Yes,” said 
the officer with a laugh, putting the paper away again, 
“it’s no calligraphy for school children. It needs to be 
studied closely. I’m quite sure that in the end you would 
understand it too. Of course the script can’t be a simple 
one; it’s not supposed to kill a man straight off, but only 
after an interval of, on an average, twelve hours; the 
turning point is reckoned to come at the sixth hour. So 
there have to be lots and lots of flourishes around the 
actual script; the script itself runs round the body only 
in a narrow girdle; the rest of the body is reserved for 
the embellishments. Can you appreciate now the work 
accomplished by the Harrow and the whole apparatus? 
—Just watch it!” He ran up the ladder, turned a wheel, 
called down: “Look out, keep to one side!” and every- 
thing started working. If the wheel had not creaked, it 
would have been marvelous. The officer, as if surprised 
by the noise of the wheel, shook his fist at it, then spread 
out his arms in excuse to the explorer and climbed down 
rapidly to peer at the working of the machine from be- 
low. Something perceptible to no one save himself was 



IN THE PENAL COLONY iOg 

Still not in order; he clambered up again, did something 
with both hands in the interior of the Designer, then 
slid down one of the rods, instead of using the ladder, 
so as to get down quicker, and with the full force of his 
lungs, to make himself heard at all in the noise, yelled 
in the explorer s ear: ‘‘Can you follow it? The Harrow 
is beginning to write; when it finishes the first draft of 
the inscription on the man’s back, the layer of cotton 
wool begins to roll and slowly turns the body over, to 
give the Harrow fresh space for writing. Meanwhile 
the raw part that has been written on lies on the cotton 
wool, which is specially prepared to staunch the bleed- 
ing and so makes all ready for a new deepening of the 
script. Then these teeth at the edge cf the Harrow, as 
the body turns further round, tear the cotton wool away 
from the wounds, throw it into the pit, and there is more 
work for the Harrow. So it keeps on writing deeper and 
deeper for the whole twelve hours. The first six hours 
the condemned man stays alive almost as before, he suf . 
fers only pain. After two hours the felt gag is taken 
away, for he has no longer strength to scream. Here, into 
this electrically heated basin at the head of the bed, 
some warm rice pap is poured, from which the man, it 
he feels like it, can take as much as his tongue can lap. 
Not one of them ever misses the chance. I can remem' 
ber none, and my experience is extensive. Only abouc 
the sixth hour does the man lose all desire to eat. I usu- 
ally kneel down here at that moment and observe what 
happens. The man rarely swallows his last mouthful, 
he only ro)ls it round his mouth and spits it out into 
the pit. I have to duck just then or he would spit it in 



IN THE PjilNAL COLONY 


104 

my face. But how quiet he grows at just about the sixth 
hour! Enlightenment comes to the most dull-witted. It 
begins around the eyes. From there it radiates. A mo- 
ment that might tempt one to get under the Harrow 
oneself. Nothing more happens than that the man be- 
gins to understand the inscription, he purses his mouth 
as if he were listening. You have seen how difficult it is 
to decipher the script with one’s eyes; but our man de- 
ciphers it with his wounds. To be sure, that is a hard 
task; he needs six hours to accomplish it. By that time 
the Harrow has pierced him quite through and casts 
him into the pit, where he pitches down upon the blood 
and water and the cotton wool. Then the judgment has 
been fulfilled, and we, the soldier and I, bury him.” 

The explorer had inclined his ear to the officer and 
with his hands in his jacket pockets watched the ma- 
chine at work. The condemned man watched it too, but 
uncomprehendingly. He bent forward a little and was 
intent on the moving needles when the soldier, at a 
sign from the officer, slashed through his shirt and trou- 
sers from behind with a knife, so that they fell off; he 
tried to catch at his falling clothes to cover his naked- 
ness, but the soldier lifted him into the air and shook 
the last remnants from him. The officer stopped the 
machine, and in the sudden silence the condemned man 
was laid under the Harrow. The chains were loosened 
and the straps fastened on instead; in the first moment 
that seemed almost a relief to the prisoner. And now the 
Harrow was adjusted a little lower, since he was a thin 
man. When the needle points touched him a shudder 



IN THE PENAL COLONY IO5 

ran over his skin; while the soldier was busy strapping 
his right hand, he flung out his left hand blindly; but 
it happened to be in the direction towards where the 
explorer was standing. The officer kept watching the 
explorer sideways, as if seeking to read from his face 
the impression made on him by the execution, which 
had been at least cursorily explained to him. 

The wrist strap broke; probably the soldier had 
drawn it too tight. The officer had to intervene, the 
soldier held up the broken piece of strap to show him. 
So the officer went over to him and said, his face still 
turned towards the explorer: “This is a very complex 
machine, it can’t be helped that things are breaking or 
giving way here and there; but one must not thereby 
allow oneself to be diverted in one’s general judgment. 
In any case, this strap is easily made good; I shall sim- 
ply use a chain; the delicacy of the vibrations for the 
right arm will of course be a little impaired.” And while 
he fastened the chains, he added: “The resources for 
maintaining the machine are now very much reduced. 
Under the former Commandant I had free access to a 
sum of money set aside entirely for this purpose. There 
was a store, too, in which spare parts were kept for re- 
pairs of all kinds. I confess I have been almost prodigal 
with them, I mean in the past, not now as the new Com- 
mandant pretends, always looking for an excuse to at- 
tack our old way of doing things. Now he h^tS taken 
charge of the machine money himself, and if I send 
for a new strap they ask for the broken old otrap as evi- 
dence, and the new strap takes ten days to appear and 



lo6 IN THE PENAL COLONY 

then is of shoddy material and not much good. But how 
I am supposed to work the machine without a strap, 
that’s something nobody bothers about.” 

The explorer thought to himself: It’s always a ticklish 
matter to intervene decisively in other people’s affairs. 
He was neither a member of the penal colony nor a 
citizen of the state to which it belonged. Were he to 
denounce this execution or actually try to stop it, they 
could say to him: You are a foreigner, mind your own 
business. He could make no answer to that, unless he 
were to add that he was amazed at himself in this con- 
nection, for he traveled only as an observer, with no 
intention at all of altering other people’s methods 
of administering justice. Yet here he found himself 
strongly tempted. The injustice of the procedure and 
the inhumanity of the execution were undeniable. No 
one could suppose that he had any selfish interest in 
the matter, for the condemned man was a complete 
stranger, not a fellow countryman or even at all sympa- 
thetic to him. The explorer himself had recommenda- 
tions from high quarters, had been received here with 
great courtesy, and the very fact that he had been in- 
vited to attend the execution seemed to suggest that his 
views would be welcome. And this was all the more 
likely since the Commandant, as he had heard only too 
plainly, was no upholder of the procedure and main- 
tained an attitude almost of hostility to the officer. 

At that moment the explorer heard the officer cry out 
in rage. He had just, with considerable difficulty, forced 
the felt gag into the condemned man’s mouth when the 
\nan in an irresistible access of nausea shut his eyes and 



IN THE PENAL COLONY 107 

vomited. Hastily the officer snatched him away from the 
gag and tried to hold his head over the pit; but it was 
too late, the vomit was running all over the machine. 
''It’s all the fault of that Commandant I” cried the offi- 
cer, senselessly shaking the brass rods in front, “the ma- 
chine is befouled like a pigsty.” With trembling hands 
he indicated to the explorer what had happened. “Have 
I not tried for hours at a time to get the Commandant 
to understand that the prisoner must fast for a whole 
day before the execution? But our new, mild doctrine 
thinks otherwise. The Commandant’s ladies stuff the 
man with sugar candy before he’s led off. He has lived 
on stinking fish his whole life long and now he has to 
eat sugar candy! But it could still be possible, I should 
have nothing to say against it, but why won’t they get 
me a new felt gag, which I have been begging for the 
last three months. How should a man not feel sick when 
he takes a felt gag into his mouth which more than a 
hundred men have already slobbered and gnawed in 
their dying moments?” 

The condemned man had laid his head down and 
looked peaceful; the soldier was busy trying to clean 
the machine with the prisoner’s shirt. The officer ad- 
vanced towards the explorer, who in some vague pre- 
sentiment fell back a pace, but the officer seized him by 
the hand, and drew him to one side. “I should like to 
exchange a few words with you in confidence,” he said, 
“may I?” “Of course,” said the explorer, and listened 
with downcast eyes. 

“This procedure and method of execution, which you 
are now having the opportunity to admire, has at the 



lo8 IN THE PENAL COLONY 

moment no longer any open adherents in our colony. 
I am its sole advocate, and at the same time the sole ad- 
vocate of the old Commandant’s tradition. I can no 
longer reckon on any further extension of the method; 
it takes all my energy to maintain it as it is. During the 
old Commandant’s lifetime the colony was full of his 
adherents; his strength of conviction I still have in some 
measure, but not an atom of his power; consequently 
the adherents have skulked out of sight, there are still 
many of them but none of them will admit it. If you 
were to go into the teahouse today, on execution day, 
and listen to what is being said, you would perhaps hear 
only ambiguous remarks. These would all be made by 
adherents, but under the present Commandant and his 
present doctrines they are of no use to me. And now I 
ask you: because of this Commandant and the women 
who influence him, is such a piece of work, the work of 
a lifetime” — he pointed to the machine — “to perish? 
Ought one to let that happen? Even if one has only come 
as a stranger to our island for a few days? But there’s no 
time to lose, an attack of some kind is impending on my 
function as judge; conferences are already being held 
in the Commandant’s office from which I am excluded; 
even your coming here today seems to me a significant 
move; they are cowards and use you as a screen, you, a 
stranger. — How different an execution was in the old 
days! A whole day before the ceremony the valley was 
packed with people; they all came only to look on; early 
in the morning the Commandant appeared with his la- 
dies; fanfares roused the whole camp; I reported that 
everything was in readiness; the assembled company — 



IN THE PENAL COLONY IO9 

no high official dared to absent himself — ^arranged itself 
round the machine; this pile of cane chairs is a miser- 
able survival from that epoch. The machine was freshly 
cleaned and glittering, I got new spare parts for almost 
every execution. Before hundreds of spectators^ — ^ail of 
them standing on tiptoe as far as the heights there — the 
condemned man was laid under the Harrow by the 
Commandant himself. What is left today for a common 
soldier to do was then my task, the task of the presiding 
judge, and was an honor for me. And then the execution 
began! No discordant noise spoilt the working of the 
machine. Many did not care to watch it but lay with 
closed eyes in the sand; they all knew: Now Justice is 
being done. In the silence one heard nothing but the 
condemned man's sighs, half muffled by the felt gag. 
Nowadays the machine can no longer wring from any- 
one a sigh louder than the felt gag can stifle; but in those 
days the writing needles let drop an acid fluid, which 
we're no longer permitted to use. Well, and then came 
the sixth hour! It was impossible to grant all the re- 
quests to be allowed to watch it from near by. The 
Commandant in his wisdom ordained that the children 
should have the preference; I, of course, because of my 
office had the privilege of always being at hand; often 
enough I would be squatting there with a small child 
in either arm. How we all absorbed the look of trans- 
figuration on the face of the sufferer, how we bathed 
our cheeks in the radiance of that justice, achieved at 
last and fading so quickly! What times these were, my 
comrade!" The officer had obviously forgotten whom 
he was addressing; he had embraced the explorer and 



no IN THE PENAL COLONY 

laid his head on his shoulder. The explorer was deeply 
embarrassed, impatiently he stared over the officer’s 
head. The soldier had finished his cleaning job and was 
now pouring rice pap from a pot into the basin. As soon 
as the condemned man, who seemed to have recovered 
entirely, noticed this action he began to reach for the 
rice with his tongue. The soldier kept pushing him away, 
since the rice pap was certainly meant for a later hour, 
yet it was just as unfitting that the soldier himself should 
thrust his dirty hands into the basin and eat out of it 
before the other’s avid face. 

The officer quickly pulled himself together. didn’t 
want to upset you,” he said. '‘I know it is impossible to 
make those days credible now. Anyhow, the machine 
is still working and it is still effective in itself. It is ef- 
fective in itself even though it stands alone in this valley. 
And the corpse still falls at the last into the pit with an 
incomprehensibly gentle wafting motion, even although 
there are no hundreds of people swarming round like 
flies as formerly. In those days we had to put a strong 
fence round the pit; it has long since been torn down.” 

The explorer wanted to withdraw his face from the 
officer and looked round him at random. The officer 
thought he was surveying the valley’s desolation; so he 
seized him by the hands, turned him round to meet his 
eyes, and asked: “Do you realize the shame of it?” 

But the explorer said nothing. The officer left him 
alone for a little; with legs apart, hands on hips, he stood 
very still, gazing at the ground. Then he smiled encour- 
agingly at the explorer and said: “I was quite near you 
yesterday when the Commandant gave you the invita- 



IN TH£ PENAL COLONY 111 

tion. I heard him giving it. I know the Commandant. I 
divined at once what he was after. Although he is power- 
ful enough to take measures against me, he doesn’t dare 
to do it yet, but he certainly means to use your verdict 
against me, the verdict of an illustrious foreigner. He 
has calculated it carefully: this is your second day on 
the island, you did not know the old Commandant and 
his ways, you are conditioned by European ways of 
thought, perhaps you object on principle to capital pun- 
ishment in general and to such mechanical instruments 
of death in particular, besides you will see that the ex- 
ecution has no support from the public, a shabby cere- 
mony — carried out with a machine already somewhat 
old and worn — now, taking all that into consideration, 
would it not be likely (so thinks the Commandant) 
that you might disapprove of my methods? And if you 
disapprove, you wouldn’t conceal the fact (Fm still 
speaking from the Commandant's point of view), for 
you are a man to feel confidence in your own well-tried 
conclusions. True, you have seen and learned to appre- 
ciate the peculiarities of many peoples, and so you would 
not be likely to take a strong line against our proceed- 
ings, as you might do in your own country. But the Com- 
mandant has no need of that. A casual, even an un- 
guarded remark will be enough. It doesn't even need 
to represent what you really think, so long as it can be 
used speciously to serve his purpose. He will try to 
prompt you with sly questions, of that I am certain. And 
his ladies will sit around you and prick up their ears; 
you might be saying something like this: 'In our country 
we have a different criminal procedure,' or 'In our coum 



112 IN THE PENAL COLONY 

try the prisoner is interrogated before he is sentenced/ 
or ‘We haven’t used torture since the Middle Ages/ All 
these statements are as true as they seem natural to you, 
harmless remarks that pass no judgment on my methods. 
But how would the Commandant react to them? I can 
see him, our good Commandant, pushing his chair away 
immediately and rushing onto the balcony, I can see 
his ladies streaming out after him, I can hear his voice 
- — the ladies call it a voice of thunder — well, and this is 
what he says: ‘A famous Western investigator, sent out 
to study criminal procedure in all the countries of the 
world, has just said that our old tradition of administer- 
ing justice is inhumane. Such a verdict from such a 
personality makes it impossible for me to countenance 
these methods any longer. Therefore from this very day 
I ordain . . .’ and so on. You may want to interpose that 
you never said any such thing, that you never called my 
methods inhumane; on the contrary your profound ex- 
perience leads you to believe they are most humane and 
most in consonance with human dignity, and you admire 
the machine greatly — ^but it will be too late; you won’t 
even get onto the balcony, crowded as it will be with 
ladies; you may try to draw attention to yourself; you 
may want to scream out; but a lady’s hand will close 
your lips — and I and the work of the old Commandant 
will be done for.” 

The explorer had to suppress a smile; so easy, then, 
was the task he had felt to be so difficult. He said eva-* 
sively: “You overestimate my influence; the Comman- 
dant has read my letters of recommendation, he knows 
that I am no expert in criminal procedure. If I were to 



IN THE PENAL COLONY II3 

give an opinion, it would be as a private individual, an 
opinion no more influential than that of any ordinary 
person, and in any case much less influential than that 
of the Commandant, who, I am given to understand, 
has very extensive powers in this penal colony. If his 
attitude to your procedure is as definitely hostile as you 
believe, then I fear the end of your tradition is at hand, 
even without any humble assistance from me.’' 

Had it dawned on the offlcer at last? No, he still 
did not understand. He shook his head emphatically, 
glanced briefly round at the condemned man and the 
soldier, who both flinched away from the rice, came close 
up to the explorer and without looking at his face but 
fixing his eye on some spot on his coat said in a lower 
voice than before: “You don’t know the Commandant; 
you feel yourself — forgive the expression — a kind of out- 
sider so far as all of us are concerned; yet, believe me, 
your influence cannot be rated too highly. I was simply 
delighted when I heard that you were to attend the 
execution all by yourself. The Commandant arranged it 
to aim a blow at me, but I shall turn it to my advantage. 
Without being distracted by lying whispers and con- 
temptuous glances — ^which could not have been avoided 
had a crowd of people attended the execution — ^you have 
heard my explanations, seen the machine and are now 
in course of watching the execution. You have doubtless 
already formed your own judgment; if you still have 
some small uncertainties the sight of the execution will 
resolve them. And now I make this request to you: help 
me against the Commandant!” 

The explorer would not let him go on. “How could 



IN THE PENAL COLONY 


114 

I do that?” he cried. *lt’s quite impossible. I can neither 
help nor hinder you,” 

'‘Yes, you can,” the officer said. The explorer saw with 
a certain apprehension that the officer had clenched 
his fists. “Yes, you can,” repeated the officer, still more 
insistently. “I have a plan that is bound to succeed. You 
believe your influence is insufficient. I know that it is 
sufficient. But even granted that you are right, is it not 
necessary, for the sake of preserving this tradition, to 
try even what might prove insufficient? Listen to my 
plan, then. The first thing necessary for you to carry it 
out is to be as reticent as possible today regarding your 
verdict on these proceedings. Unless you are asked a 
direct question you must say nothing at all; but what 
you do say must be brief and general; let it be remarked 
that you would prefer not to discuss the matter, that 
you are out of patience with it, that if you are to let 
yourself go you would use strong language. I don’t ask 
you to tell any lies; by no means; you should only give 
curt answers, such as: ‘Yes, I saw the execution,’ or ‘Yes, 
I had it explained to me.’ Just that, nothing more. 
There are grounds enough for any impatience you 
betray, although not such as will occur to the Com- 
mandant. Of course, he will mistake your meaning 
and interpret it to please himself. That’s what my 
plan depends on. Tomorrow in the Commandant’s office 
there is to be a large conference of all the high adminis- 
trative officials, the Commandant presiding. Of course 
the Commandant is the kind of man to have turned 
these conferences into public spectacles. He has had a 
gallery built that is always packed with spectators. I am 



IN THE PENAL COLONY II5 

compelled to take part in the conferences, but they make 
me sick with disgust. Now, whatever happens, you will 
certainly be invited to this conference; if you behave 
today as I suggest the invitation will become an urgent 
request. But if for some mysterious reason you’re not 
invited, you’ll have to ask for an invitation; there’s no 
doubt of your getting it then. So tomorrow you’re sit- 
ting in the Commandant’s box with the ladies. He keeps 
looking up to make sure you’re there. After various triv- 
ial and ridiculous matters, brought in merely to impress 
the audience — mostly harbor works, nothing but harbor 
works! — our judicial procedure comes up for discussion 
too. If the Commandant doesn’t introduce it, or not 
soon enough, I’ll see that it’s mentioned. I’ll stand up 
and report that today’s execution has taken place. Quite 
briefly, only a statement. Such a statement is not usual, 
but I shall make it. The Commandant thanks me, as 
always, with an amiable smile, and then he can’t restrain 
himself, he seizes the excellent opportunity. It has just 
been reported,’ he will say, or words to that effect, hhat 
an execution has taken place. I should like merely to 
add that this execution was witnessed by the famous 
explorer who has, as you all know, honored our colony 
so greatly by his visit to us. His presence at today’s ses- 
sion of our conference also contributes to the impor- 
tance of this occasion. Should we not now ask the famous 
explorer to give us his verdict on our traditional mode 
of execution and the procedure that leads up to it?’ Of 
course there is loud applause, general agreement, I am 
more insistent than anyone. The Commandant bows 
to you and says: 'Then in the name of the assembled 



Il6 IN THE PENAL COLONY 

company, I put the question to you/ And now you ad- 
vance to the front of the box. Lay your hands where 
everyone can see them, or the ladies will catch them and 
press your fingers. — ^And then at last you can speak out. 
I don’t know how I’m going to endure the tension of 
waiting for that moment. Don’t put any restraint on 
yourself when you make your speech, publish the truth 
aloud, lean over the front of the box, shout, yes, indeed, 
shout your verdict, your unshakable conviction, at the 
Commandant. Yet perhaps you wouldn’t care to do 
that, it’s not in keeping with your character, in your 
country perhaps people do these things differently, well, 
that’s all right too, that will be quite as effective, don’t 
even stand up, just say a few words, even in a whisper, 
so that only the officials beneath you will hear them, 
that will quite enough, you don’t even need to men- 
tion the lack of public support for the execution, the 
creaking wheel, the broken strap, the filthy gag of felt, 
no, I’ll take all that upon me, and, believe me, if my 
indictment doesn’t drive him out of the conference 
hall, it will force him to his knees to make the acknowl- 
edgment: Old Commandant, I humble myself before 
you. — ^That is my plan; will you help me to carry it 
out? But of course you are willing, what is more, you 
must.” And the officer seized the explorer by both arms 
and gazed, breathing heavily, into his face. He had 
shouted the last sentence so loudly that even the sol- 
dier and the condemned man were startled into attend- 
ing; they had not understood a word but they stopped 
eating and looked over at the explorer, chewing their 
previous mouthfuls. 



IN THE PENAL COLONY II7 

From the very beginning the explorer had no doubt 
about what answer he must give; in his lifetime he had 
experienced too much to have any uncertainty here; he 
was fundamentally honorable and unafraid. And yet 
now, facing the soldier and the condemned man, he did 
hesitate, for as long as it took to draw one breath. At 
last, however, he said, as he had to: ‘'No.’’ The officer 
blinked several times but did not turn his eyes away. 
‘‘Would you like me to explain?” asked the explorer. 
The officer nodded wordlessly. “I do not approve of 
your procedure,” said the explorer then, “even before 
you took me into your confidence — of course I shall 
never in any circumstances betray your confidence — I 
was already wondering whether it would be my duty to 
intervene and whether my intervention would have the 
slightest chance of success. I realized to whom I ought 
to turn: to the Commandant, of course. You have made 
that fact even clearer, but without having strengthened 
my resolution; on the contrary, your sincere conviction 
has touched me, even though it cannot influence my 
judgment.” 

The officer remained mute, turned to the machine, 
caught hold of a brass rod, and then, leaning back a 
little, gazed at the Designer as if to assure himself that 
all was in order. The soldier and the condemned man 
seemed to have come to some understanding; the con- 
demned man was making signs to the soldier, difficult 
though his movements were because of the tight straps; 
the soldier was bending down to him; the condemned 
man whispered something and the soldier nodded. 

The explorer followed the officer and said: “You don’t 



Il8 IN THE PENAL COLONY 

know yet what I mean to do. I shall tell the Comman-^ 
dant what I think of the procedure, certainly, but 
not at a public conference, only in private; nor shall I 
stay here long enough to attend any conference; I am 
going away early tomorrow morning, or at least em- 
barking on my ship.” 

It did not look as if the officer had been listening. '‘So 
you did not find the procedure convincing,” he said to 
himself and smiled, as an old man smiles at childish 
nonsense and yet pursues his own meditations behind 
the smile. 

“Then the time has come,” he said at last, and sud- 
denly looked at the explorer with bright eyes that held 
some challenge, some appeal for co-operation. “The 
time for what?” asked the explorer uneasily, but got no 
answer. 

“You are free,” said the officer to the condemned man 
in the native tongue. The man did not believe it at first. 
“Yes, you are set free,” said the officer. For the first time 
the condemned man’s face woke to real animation. Was 
it true? Was it only a caprice of the officer’s that might 
change again? Had the foreign explorer begged him 
off? What was it? One could read these questions on his 
face. But not for long. Whatever it might be, he wanted 
to be really free if he might, and he began to struggle so 
far as the Harrow permitted him. 

“You’ll burst my straps,” cried the officer. “Lie still! 
We’ll soon loosen them.” And signing the soldier to 
help him, he set about doing so. The condemned man 
laughed wordlessly to himself, now he turned his face 



IN THE PENAL COLONY II9 

left towards the officer, now right towards the soldier, 
nor did he forget the explorer. 

“Draw him out,” ordered the officer. Because of the 
Harrow this had to be done with some care. The con- 
demned man had already torn himself a little in the 
back through his impatience. 

From now on, however, the officer paid hardly any 
attention to him. He went up to the explorer, pulled 
out the small leather wallet again, turned over the pa- 
pers in it, found the one he wanted and showed it to the 
explorer. “Read it,” he said. “I can’t,” said the explorer, 
“I told you before that I can’t make out these scripts.” 
“Try taking a close look at it,” said the officer and came 
quite near to the explorer so that they might read it to- 
gether. But when even that proved useless, he outlined 
the script with his little finger, holding it high above 
the paper as if the surface dared not be sullied by touch, 
in order to help the explorer to follow the script in that 
way. The explorer did make an eflEort, meaning to please 
the officer in this respect at least, but he was quite un- 
able to follow. Now the officer began to spell it, letter 
by letter, and then read out the words. 'be just!’ is 
what is written there,” he said. “Surely you can read it 
now.” The explorer bent so close to the paper that the 
officer feared he might touch it and drew it farther 
away; the explorer made no remark, yet it was clear 
that he still could not decipher it. “ ‘be just!’ is what 
is written there,” said the officer once more. “Maybe,” 
said the explorer, “I am prepared to believe you.” 
“Well, then,” said the officer, at least partly satisfied. 



120 IN THE PENAL COLONY 

and climbed up the ladder with the paper; very care- 
fully he laid it inside the Designer and seemed to be 
changing the disposition of all the cogwheels; it was a 
troublesome piece of work and must have involved 
wheels that were extremely small, for sometimes the 
officer’s head vanished altogether from sight inside the 
Designer, so precisely did he have to regulate the ma- 
chinery. 

The explorer, down below, watched the labor unin- 
terruptedly, his neck grew stiff and his eyes smarted 
from the glare of sunshine over the sky. The soldier and 
the condemned man were now busy together. The 
man's shirt and trousers, which were already lying in 
the pit, were fished out by the point of the soldier’s 
bayonet. The shirt was abominably dirty and its owner 
washed it in the bucket of water. When he put on the 
shirt and trousers both he and the soldier could not 
help guffawing, for the garments were of course slit up 
behind. Perhaps the condemned man felt it incumbent 
on him to amuse the soldier, he turned round and 
round in his slashed garments before the soldier, who 
squatted on the ground beating his knees with mirth. 
All the same, they presently controlled their mirth out 
of respect for the gentlemen. 

When the officer had at length finished his task aloft, 
he surveyed the machinery in all its details once more, 
with a smile, but this time shut the lid of the Designer, 
which had stayed open till now, climbed down, looked 
into the pit and then at the condemned man, noting 
with satisfaction that the clothing had been taken out, 
then went over to wash his hands in the water bucket, 



IN THE PENAL COLONY IS) 

perceived too late that it was disgustingly dirty, was un- 
happy because he could not wash his hands, in the end 
thrust them into the sand — this alternative did not 
please him, but he had to put up with it — then stood up- 
right and began to unbutton his uniform jacket. As he 
did this, the two ladies’ handkerchiefs he had tucked 
under his collar fell into his hands. “Here are you! 
handkerchiefs,” he said, and threw them to the con 
demned man. And to the explorer he said in explana 
tion; “A gift from the ladies.” 

In spite of the obvious haste with which he was dis 
carding first his uniform jacket and then all his clothing, 
he handled each garment with loving care, he even ran 
his fingers caressingly over the silver lace on the jacket 
and shook a tassel into place. This loving care was cer- 
tainly out of keeping with the fact that as soon as he 
had a garment off he flung it at once with a kind of un- 
willing jerk into the pit. The last thing left to him was 
his short sword with the sword belt. He drew it out of 
the scabbard, broke it, then gathered all together, the 
bits of the sword, the scabbard and the belt, and flung 
them so violently down that they clattered into the pit. 

Now he stood naked there. The explorer bit his lips 
and said nothing. He knew very well what was going to 
happen, but he had no right to obstruct the officer in 
anything. If the judicial procedure which the officer 
cherished were really so near its end — possibly as a re- 
sult of his own intervention, as to which he felt him- 
self pledged — then the ofiBcer was doing the right thing: 
in his place the explorer would not have acted other- 
wise. 



122 IN THE PENAL COLONY 

The soldier and the condemned man did not under- 
stand at first what was happening; at first they were not 
even looking on. The condemned man was gleeful at 
having got the handkerchiefs back, but he was not al- 
lowed to enjoy them for long, since the soldier snatched 
them with a sudden, unexpected gi"ab. Now the con- 
demned man in turn was trying to twitch tliem from 
under the belt where the soldier had tucked them, but 
the soldier was on his guard. So they were wrestling, 
half in jest. Only when the officer stood quite naked 
was their attention caught. The condemned man espe- 
cially seemed struck with the notion that some great 
change was impending. What had happened to him 
was now going to happen to the officer. Perhaps even to 
the very end. Apparently the foreign explorer had given 
the order for it. So this was revenge. Although he him- 
self had not suffered to the end, he was to be revenged 
to the end. A broad, silent grin now appeared on his 
face and stayed there all the rest of the time. 

The officer, however, had turned to the machine. It 
had been clear enough previously that he understood 
the machine well, but now it was almost staggering to 
see how he managed it and how it obeyed him. His hand 
had only to approach the Harrow for it to rise and sink 
several times till it was adjusted to the right position 
for receiving him; he touched only the edge of the 
Bed and already it was vibrating; the felt gag came to 
meet his mouth, one could see that the officer was really 
reluctant to take it but he shrank from it only a mo- 
ment, soon he submitted and received it. Everything 
was ready, only the straps hung down at the sides, yet 



IN THE PENAL COLONY 123 

they were obviously unnecessary, the officer did not 
need to be fastened down. Then the condemned man 
noticed the loose straps, in his opinion the execution was 
incomplete unless the straps were buckled, he gestured 
eagerly to the soldier and they ran together to strap the 
officer down. The latter had already stretched out one 
foot to push the lever that started the Designer; he saw 
the two men coming up; so he drew his foot back and let 
himself be buckled in. But now he could not reach the 
lever; neither the soldier nor the condemned man would 
be able to find it, and the explorer was determined not 
to lift a finger. It was not necessary; as soon as the straps 
were fastened the machine began to work; the Bed 
vibrated, the needles flickered above the skin, the Har- 
row rose and fell. The explorer had been staring at it 
quite a while before he remembered that a wheel in the 
Designer should have been creaking; but everything 
was quiet, not even the slightest hum could be heard. 

Because it was working so silently the machine sim- 
ply escaped one’s attention. The explorer observed the 
soldier and the condemned man. The latter was the 
more animated of the two, everything in the machine 
interested him, now he was bending down and nov)’ 
stretching up on tiptoe, his forefinger was extended all 
the time pointing out details to the soldier. This an 
noyed the explorer. He was resolved to stay till the end, 
but he could not bear the sight of these two. “Go back 
home,’' he said. The soldier would have been willing 
enough, but the condemned man took the order as a 
punishment. With clasped hands he implored to be al- 
lowed to stay, and when the explorer shook his head 



124 PENAL COLONY 

and would not relent, he even went down on his knees- 
The explorer saw that it was no use merely giving or- 
ders; he was on the point of going over and driving them 
away. At that moment he heard a noise above him in the 
Designer. He looked up. Was that cogwheel going to 
make trouble after all? But it was something quite dif- 
ferent. Slowly the lid of the Designer rose up and then 
clicked wide open. The teeth of a cogwheel showed 
themselves and rose higher, soon the whole wheel was 
visible; it was as if some enormous force were squeezing 
the Designer so that there was no longer room for the 
wheel; die wheel moved up till it came to the very edge 
of the Designer, fell down, rolled along the sand a little 
on its rim and then lay flat. But a second wheel was 
already rising after it, followed by many others, large 
and small and indistinguishably minute, the same thing 
happened to all of them, at every moment one imagined 
the Designer must now really be empty, but another 
complex of numerous wheels was already rising into 
sight, falling down, trundling along the sand and lying 
flat. This phenomenon made the condemned man com- 
pletely forget the explorer’s command, the cogwheels 
fascinated him, he was always trying to catch one and 
at the same time urging the soldier to help, but always 
drew back his hand in alarm, for another wheel always 
came hopping along which, at least on its first advance, 
scared him off. 

The explorer, on the other hand, felt greatly trou- 
bled; the machine was obviously going to pieces; its 
silent working was a delusion; he had a feeling that 
ue must now stand by the officer, since the officer was 



IN THE PENAL COLONY 125 

no longer able to look after himself. But while the tum- 
bling cogwheels absorbed his whole attention he had 
forgotten to keep an eye on the rest of the machine; 
now that the last cogwheel had left the Designer, how- 
ever, he bent over the Harrow and had a new and still 
more unpleasant surprise. The Harrow was not writing, 
it was only jabbing, and the bed was not turning the 
body over but only bringing it up quivering against the 
needles. The explorer wanted to do something, if pos^ 
sible, to bring the whole machine to a standstill, foi 
this was no exquisite torture such as the officer desired, 
this was plain murder. He stretched out his hands. But 
at that moment the Harrow rose with the body spitted 
on it and moved to the side, as it usually did only when 
the twelfth hour had come. Blood was flowing in a hun- 
dred streams, not mingled with water, the water jets 
too had failed to function. And now the last action 
failed to fulfil itself, the body did not drop off the long 
needles, streaming with blood it went on hanging over 
the pit without falling into it. The Harrow tried to 
move back to its old position, but as if it had itself no- 
ticed that it had not yet got rid of its burden it stuck 
after all where it was, over the pit. “Come and helpl’' 
cried the explorer to the other two, and himself seized 
the officer's feet. He wanted to push against the feet 
while the others seized the head from the opposite side 
and so the officer might be slowly eased off the needles, 
But the other two could not make up their minds tc 
come; the condemned man actually turned away; the 
explorer had to go over to them and force them into 
position at the officer's head. And here, almost against 



126 IN THE PENAL COLONY 

his will, he had to look at the face of the corpse. It was 
as it had been in life; no sign was visible of the promised 
■redemption; what the others had found in the machine 
the officer had not found; the lips were firmly pressed 
together, the eyes were open, with the same expression 
as in life, the look was calm and convinced, through the 
forehead went the point of the great iron spike. 

As the explorer, with the soldier and the condemned 
man behind him, reached the first houses of the colony, 
the soldier pointed to one of them and said: “There is 
the teahouse.” 

In the ground floor of the house was a deep, low, 
cavernous space, its walls and ceiling blackened with 
smoke. It was open to the road all along its length. Al- 
though this teahouse was very little different from the 
other houses of the colony, which were all very dilapi- 
dated, even up to the Commandant’s palatial headquar- 
ters, it made on the explorer the impression of a historic 
tradition of some kind, and he felt the power of past 
days. He went near to it, followed by his companions, 
right up between the empty tables which stood in the 
street before it, and breathed the cool, heavy air that 
tame from the interior. “The old man’s buried here,” 
said the soldier. “The priest wouldn’t let him lie in the 
churchyard. Nobody knew where to bury him for a 
while, but in the end they buried him here. The officer 
never told you about that, for sure, because of course 
that’s what he was most ashamed of. He even tried sev- 
eral times to dig the old man up by night, but he was 
always chased away.” “Where is the grave?” asked the 



IN THE PENAL COLONY 12^ 

explorer, who found it impossible to believe the soldier* 
At once both of them, the soldier and the condemned 
man, ran before him pointing with outstretched hands 
in the direction where the grave should be. They led 
the explorer right up to the back wall, where guests 
were sitting at a few tables. They were apparently docl: 
laborers, strong men with short, glistening, full hlzck 
beards. None had a jacket, their shirts were torn, they 
were poor, humble creatures. As the explorer drew near, 
some of them got up, pressed close to the wall, and 
stared at him. ‘‘It’s a foreigner,'’ ran the whisper around 
him. “He wants to see the grave." They pushed one of 
the tables aside, and under it there was really a grave- 
stone. It was a simple stone, low enough to be covered 
by a table. There was an inscription on it in very small 
letters, the explorer had to kneel down to read it. This 
was what it said: “Here rests the old Commandant. His 
adherents, who now must be nameless, have dug this 
grave and set up this stone. There is a prophecy that 
after a certain number of years the Commandant will 
rise again and lead his adherents from this house to 
recover the colony. Have faith and wait!" When the ex- 
plorer had read this and risen to his feet he saw all the 
bystanders around him smiling, as if they too had read 
the inscription, had found it ridiculous and were ex- 
pecting him to agree with them. The explorer ignored 
this, distributed a few coins among them, waiting till 
the table was pushed over the grave again, quitted the 
teahouse and made for the harbor. 

The soldier and the condemned man had found some 
acquaintances in the teahouse, who detained them. But 



128 


IN THE PENAL COLONY 


they must have soon shaken them off, for the explorer 
was only halfway down the long flight of steps leading 
to the boats when they came rushing after him. Prob- 
ably they wanted to force him at the last minute to take 
them with him. While he was bargaining below with 
a ferryman to row him to the steamer, the two of them 
came headlong down the steps, in silence, for they did 
not dare to shout. But by the time they reached the 
foot of the steps the explorer was already in the boat, 
and the ferryman was just casting off from the shore. 
They could have jumped into the boat, but the explorer 
lifted a heavy knotted rope from the floor boards, 
threatened them with it and so kept them from attempt- 
ing the leap. 



The Great Wall of China 


The Great Wall of China was finished off at its north 
ernmost corner. From the south-east and the south-west 
it came up in two sections that finally converged there. 
This principle of piecemeal construction was also ap- 
plied on a smaller scale by both of the two great armies 
of labor, the eastern and the western. It was done in 
this way: gangs of some twenty workers were formed 
who had to accomplish a length, say, of five hundred 
yards of wall, while a similar gang built another stretch 
of the same length to meet the first. But after the 
junction had been made the construction of the wall 
was not carried on from the point, let us say, where this 
thousand yards ended; instead the two groups of work- 
ers were transferred to begin building again in quite 
different neighborhoods. Naturally in this way many 
great gaps were left, which were only filled in gradually 
and bit by bit, some, indeed, not till after the official an- 
nouncement that the wall was finished. In fact it is said 
that there are gaps which have never been filled in at 
all, an assertion, however, which is probably merely one 
of the many legends to which the building of the wall 
gave rise, and which cannot be verified, at least by any 



THE GREAT WALL OF CHINA 


130 

single man with his own eyes and judgment, on account 
of the extent of the structure. 

Now on first thoughts one might conceive that it 
would have been more advantageous in every way to 
build the wall continuously, or at least continuously 
within the two main divisions. After all the wall was 
intended, as was universally proclaimed and known, to 
be a protection against the peoples of the north. But 
how can a wall protect if it is not a continuous structure? 
Not only cannot such a wall protect, but what there is 
of it is in perpetual danger. These blocks of wall left 
standing in deserted regions could be easily pulled 
down again and again by the nomads, especially as these 
tribes, rendered apprehensive by the building opera^ 
tions, kept changing their encampments with incredible 
rapidity, like locusts, and so perhaps had a better gen- 
eral view of the progress of the wall than we, the build- 
ers. Nevertheless the task of construction probably could 
not have been carried out in any other way. To under- 
stand this we must take into account the following: The 
wall was to be a protection for centuries: accordingly 
the most scrupulous care in the building, the applica- 
tion of the architectural wisdom of all known ages and 
peoples, an unremitting sense of personal responsibility 
in the builders, were indispensable prerequisites for 
the work. True, for the more purely manual tasks ig- 
norant day laborers from the populace, men, women 
and children who offered their services for good money, 
could be employed; but for the supervision even of 
every four day laborers an expert versed in the art of 
building was required, a man who was capable of en- 



THE GREAT WALL OF CHINA IgJ 

tering into and feeling with all his heart what was 
involved. And the higher the task, the greater the 
responsibility. And such men were actually to be had, 
if not indeed so abundantly as the work of construction 
could have absorbed, yet in great numbers. 

For the work had not been undertaken without 
thought. Fifty years before the first stone w’^as laid the 
art of architecture, and especially that of masonry, had 
been proclaimed as the most important branch of knowl- 
edge throughout the whole area of a China that was to 
be walled round, and all other arts gained recognition 
only in so far as they had reference to it. I can still 
remember quite well us standing as small children, 
scarcely sure on our feet, in our teacher’s garden, and 
being ordered to build a sort of wall out of pebbles; and 
then the teacher, girding up his robe, ran full tilt against 
the wall, of course knocking it down, and scolded us so 
terribly for the shoddiness of our work that we ran 
weeping in all directions to our parents. A trivial inci- 
dent, but significant of the spirit of the time. 

I was lucky inasmuch as the building of the wall was 
just beginning when, at twenty, I had passed the last 
examination of the lowest grade school. I say lucky, for 
many who before my time had achieved the highest 
degree of culture available to them could find nothing 
year after year to do with their knowledge, and drifted 
uselessly about with the most splendid architectural 
plans in their heads, and sank by thousands into hope- 
lessness. But those who finally came to be employed in 
the work as supervisors, even though it might be of the 
lowest rank, were truly worthy of their task. They were 



igS THE GREAT WALL OF CHINA 

masons who had reflected much, and did not cease to 
reflect, on the building of the -wall, men who with the 
first stone which they sank in the ground felt them- 
selves a part of the wall. Masons of that kind, of course, 
had not only a desire to perform their work in the most 
thorough manner, but were also impatient to see the 
wall finished in its complete perfection. Day laborers 
have not this impatience, for they look only to their 
wages, and the highei' supervisors, indeed even the 
supervisors of middle rank, could see enough of the man- 
ifold growth of the construction to keep their spirits 
confident and high. But to encourage the subordinate 
supervisors, intellectually so vastly superior to their ap- 
parently petty tasks, other measures must be taken. One 
could not, for instance, expect them to lay one stone 
on another for months or even years on end, in an 
uninhabited mountainous region, hundreds of miles 
from their homes; the hopelessness of such hard toil, 
which yet could not reach completion even in the long- 
est lifetime, would have cast them into despair and 
above all made them less capable for the work. It was 
for this reason that the system of piecemeal building 
was decided on. Five hundred yards could be accom- 
plished in about five years; by that time, however, the 
supervisors were as a rule quite exhausted and had lost 
all faith in themselves, in the wall, in the world. Ac- 
cordingly, while they were still exalted by the jubilant 
celebrations marking the completion of the thousand 
yards of wall, they were sent far, far away, saw on their 
journey finished sections of the wall rising here and 
there, came past the quarters of the high command and 



THE GREAT WALL OF CHINA IgJ 

were presented with badges of honor, heard the re- 
joicings of new armies of labor streaming past from 
the depths of the land, saw forests being cut down to 
become supports for the wall, saw mountains being 
hewn into stones for the wall, heard at the holy shrines 
hymns rising in which the pious prayed for the comple- 
tion of the wall. All this assuaged their impatience. The 
quiet life of their homes, where they rested some time, 
strengthened them; the humble credulity with which 
their reports were listened to, the confidence with which 
the simple and peaceful burgher believed in the even- 
tual completion of the wall, all this tightened up again 
the cords of the soul. Like eternally hopeful children 
they then said farewell to their homes; the desire once 
more to labor on the wall of the nation became ir- 
resistible. They set off earlier than they needed; half 
the village accompanied them for long distances. Groups 
of people with banners and scarfs waving were on all 
the roads; never before had they seen how great and 
rich and beautiful and worthy of love their country was. 
Every fellow-countryman was a brother for whom one 
was building a wall of protection, and who would re- 
turn lifelong thanks for it with all he had and did. 
Unity! Unity! Shoulder to shoulder, a ring of brothers, 
a current of blood no longer confined within the narrow 
circulation of one body, but sweetly rolling and yet 
ever returning throughout the endless leagues of China. 

Thus, then, the system of piecemeal construction 
becomes comprehensible; but there were still other 
reasons for it as well. Nor is there anything odd in my 
pausing over this question for so long; it is one of tb^’ 



134 the great wall of china 

crucial problems in the whole building of the wall, un- 
important as it may appear at first glance. If I am to con- 
vey and make understandable the ideas and feelings of 
that time I cannot go deeply enough into this very ques- 
tion. 

First, then, it must be said that in those days things 
were achieved scarcely inferior to the construction of 
the Tower of Babel, although as regards divine ap- 
proval, at least according to human reckoning, strongly 
at variance with that work. I say this because during 
the early days of building a scholar wrote a book in 
which he drew the comparison in the most exhaustive 
way. In it he tried to prove that the Tower of Babel 
failed to reach its goal, not because of the reasons uni- 
versally advanced, or at least that among those recog- 
nized reasons the most important of all was not to be 
found. His proofs were drawn not merely from written 
documents and reports; he also claimed to have made 
enquiries on the spot, and to have discovered that the 
tower failed and was bound to fail because of the weak- 
ness of the foundation. In this respect at any rate our 
i.ge was vastly superior to that ancient one. Almost every 
educated man of our time was a mason by profession 
and infallible in the matter of laying foundations. That, 
however, was not what our scholar was concerned to 
prove; for he maintained that the Great Wall alone 
would provide for the first time in the history of man- 
kind a secure foundation for a new Tower of Babel. 
First the wall, therefore, and then the tower. His book 
was in everybody’s hands at that time, but I admit that 
even today 1 cannot qiute make out how he conceived 



THE GREAT WALL OF CHINA 135 

this tower. How could the wall, which did not form even 
a circle, but only a sort of quarter or half-circle, provide 
the foundation for a tower? That could obviously be 
meant only in a spiritual sense. But in that case why 
build the actual wall, which after all was something con- 
crete, the results of the lifelong labor of multitudes of 
people? And why were there in the book plans, some- 
what nebulous plans, it must be admitted, of the tower, 
and proposals worked out in detail for mobilizing the 
people's energies for the stupendous new work? 

There were many wild ideas in people's heads at that 
time — this scholar's book is only one example — perhaps 
simply because so many were trying to join forces as 
far as they could for the achievement of a single aim. 
Human nature, essentially changeable, unstable as the 
dust, can endure no restraint; if it binds itself it soon 
begins to tear madly at its bonds, until it rends every- 
thing asunder, the wall, the bonds and its very self. 

It is possible that these very considerations, which 
militated against the building of the wall at all, were 
not left out of account by the high command when the 
system of piecemeal construction was decided on. We — 
and here I speak in the name of many people — did not 
really know ourselves until we had carefully scruti- 
nized the decrees of the high command, when we dis« 
covered that without the high command neither our 
book learning nor our human understanding would have 
sufficed for the humble tasks which we performed in the 
great whole. In the office of the command — ^where it was 
and who sat there no one whom I have asked knew then 
or knows now — in that office one may be certain that all 



136 THE GREAT WALL OF CHINA 

human thoughts and desires were revolved, and counter 
to them all human aims and fulfilments. And through 
the window the reflected splendors of divine worlds 
fell on the hands of the leaders as they traced their plans. 

And for that reason the incorruptible observer must 
hold that the command, if it had seriously desired it, 
could also have overcome those difficulties which pre- 
vented a system of continuous construction. There re- 
mains, therefore, nothing but the conclusion that the 
command deliberately chose the system of piecemeal 
construction. But the piecemeal construction was only a 
makeshift and therefore inexpedient. Remains the con- 
clusion that the command willed something inexpedi- 
ent. — Strange conclusion! — True, and yet in one respect 
it has much to be said for it. One can perhaps safely 
discuss it now. In those days many people, and among 
them the best, had a secret maxim which ran: Try with 
all your might to comprehend the decrees of the high 
command, but only up to a certain point; then avoid 
further meditation. A very wise maxim, which moreover 
was elaborated in a parable that was later often quoted: 
Avoid further meditation, but not because it might be 
harmful; it is not at all certain that it would be harmful. 
What is harmful or not harmful has nothing to do with 
the question. Consider rather the river in spring. It 
rises until it grows mightier and nourishes more richly 
the soil on the long stretch of its banks, still maintaining 
its own course until it reaches the sea, where it is all the 
more welcome because it is a worthier ally. — Thus far 
may you urge your meditations on the decrees of the 
high command, — But after that the river overflows its 



THE GREAT WALL OF CHINA 137 

banks, loses outline and shape, slows down the speed ol; 
its current, tries to ignore its destiny by forming little 
seas in the interior of the land, damages the fields, and 
yet cannot maintain itself for long in its new expanse, 
but must run back between its banks again, must even 
dry up wretchedly in the hot season that presently fol- 
lows. — Thus far may you not urge your meditations on 
the decrees of the high command. 

Now though this parable may have had extraordinary 
point and force during the building of the wall, it has 
at most only a restricted relevance for my present essay. 
My enquiry is purely historical; no lightning hashes any 
longer from the long since vanished thunderclouds, and 
so I may venture to seek for an explanation of the system 
of piecemeal construction which goes farther than the 
one that contented people then. The limits which my 
capacity for thought imposes upon me are narrow 
enough, but the province to be traversed here is infinite. 
Against whom was the Great Wall to serve as a protec- 
tion? Against the people of the north. Now, I come from 
the south-east of China. No northern people can menace 
us there. We read of them in the books of the ancients; 
the cruelties which they commit in accordance with 
their nature make us sigh beneath our peaceful trees. 
The faithful representations of the artist show us these 
faces of the damned, their gaping mouths, their jaws 
furnished with great pointed teeth, their half-shut eyes 
that already seem to be seeking out the victim which 
their jaws will rend and devour. When our children are 
unruly we show them these pictures, and at once they 
fly weeping into our arms. But nothing more than that 



agS THE GREAT WALL OF CHINA 

do we know about these northerners. We have not seen 
them, and if we remain in our villages we shall never 
see them, even if on their wild horses they should ride 
as hard as they can straight towards us — the land is too 
vast and would not let them reach us, they would end 
their course in the empty air. 

Why, then, since that is so, did we leave our homes, 
the stream with its bridges, our mothers and fathers, our 
weeping wives, our children who needed our care, and 
depart for the distant city to be trained there, while 
our thoughts journeyed still farther away to the wall in 
the north? Why? A question for the high command. Our 
leaders know us. They, absorbed in gigantic anxieties, 
know of us, know our petty pursuits, see us sitting to- 
gether in our humble huts, and approve or disapprove 
the evening prayer which the father of the house recites 
in the midst of his family. And if I may be allowed to 
express such ideas about the high command, then I 
must say that in my opinion the high command has ex- 
isted from old time, and was not assembled, say, like a 
gathering of mandarins summoned hastily to discuss 
somebody’s fine dream in a conference as hastily ter- 
minated, sc that that very evening the people are 
drummed out of their beds to carry out what has been 
decided, even if it should be nothing but an illumination 
in honor of a god who may have shown great favor to 
their masters the day before, only to drive them into 
some dark corner with cudgel blows tomorrow, almos^ 
before the illuminations have died down. Far rather 
do I believe that the high command has existed from all 



THE GREAT WALL OF CHINA 139 

eternity, and the decision to build the wall likewise. 
Unwitting peoples of the north, who imagined they 
were the cause of it! Honest, unwitting Emperor, who 
imagined he decreed it! We builders of the wall know 
that it was not so and hold our tongues. 

^ ^ -iu 

w w 

During the building of the wall and ever since to this 
very day I have occupied myself almost exclusively with 
the comparative history of races — there are certain ques- 
tions which one can probe to the marrow, as it were, 
only by this method — and I have discovered that we 
Chinese possess certain folk and political institutions 
that are unique in their clarity, others again unique in 
their obscurity. The desire to trace the causes of these 
phenomena, especially the latter, has always teased me 
and teases me still, and the building of the wall is itself 
essentially involved with these problems. 

Now one of the most obscure of our institutions is 
that of the empire itself. In Pekin, naturally, at the 
imperial court, there is some clarity to be found on this 
subject, though even that is more illusive than real. Also 
the teachers of political law and history in the high 
schools claim to be exactly informed on these matters, 
and to be capable of passing on their knowledge to their 
students. The further one descends among the lower 
schools the more, naturally enough, does one find teach- 
ers’ and pupils’ doubts of their own knowledge vanish- 
ing, and superficial culture mounting sky-high round 
a few precepts that have been drilled into people’s 



THE GREAT WALL OF CHINA 


140 

minds for centuries, precepts which, though they have 
lost nothing of their eternal truth, remain eternally in- 
visible in this fog of confusion. 

But it is precisely this question of the empire which 
in my opinion the common people should be asked to 
answer, since after all they are the empire’s final sup- 
port. Here, I must confess, I can only speak once more 
for my native place. Except for the nature gods and their 
ritual, which fills the whole year in such beautiful and 
rich alternation, we think only about the Emperor. But 
not about the present one; or rather we would think 
about the present one if we knew who he was or knew 
anything definite about him. True — and it is the sole 
curiosity that fills us — ^we are always trying to get infor- 
mation on this subject, but, strange as it may sound, it 
is almost impossible to discover anything, either from 
pilgrims, though they have wandered through many 
lands, or from near or distant villages, or from sailors, 
though they have navigated not only our little stream, 
but also the sacred rivers. One hears a great many things, 
true, but can gather nothing definite. 

So vast is our land that no fable could do justice to its 
vastness, the heavens can scarcely span it — ^and Pekin 
is only a dot in it, and the imperial palace less than a 
dot. The Emperor as such, on the other hand, is mighty 
throughout all the hierarchies of the world: admitted. 
But the existent Emperor, a man like us, lies much like 
us on a couch which is of generous proportions, perhaps, 
and yet very possibly may be quite narrow and short, 
Like us he sometimes stretches himself and when he 
is very tired yawns with his delicately cut mouth. But 



THE GREAT WALL OF CHINA 14I 

how should we know anything about that — thousands 
of miles away in the South — almost on the borders of the 
Tibetan Highlands? And besides, any tidings, even if 
they did reach us, would arrive far too late, would 
have become obsolete long before they reached us. The 
Emperor is always surrounded by a brilliant and yet 
ambiguous throng of nobles and courtiers — malice and 
enmity in the guise of servants and friends — who form 
a counter-weight to the Imperial power and perpetually 
labor to unseat the ruler from his place with poisoned 
arrows. The Empire is immortal, but the Emperor him- 
self totters and falls from his throne, yes, whole dynasties 
sink in the end and breathe their last in one death-rattle. 
Of these struggles and sufferings the people will never 
know; like tardy arrivals, like strangers in a city, they 
stand at the end of some densely thronged side street 
peacefully munching the food they have brought with 
them, while far away in front, in the market square at 
the heart of the city, the execution of their ruler is 
proceeding. 

There is a parable that describes this situation very 
well: The Emperor, so it runs, has sent a message to 
you, the humble subject, the insignificant shadow cow- 
ering in the remotest distance before the imperial sun; 
the Emperor from his death-bed has sent a message to 
you alone. He has commanded the messenger to kneel 
down by the bed, and has whispered the message to him; 
so much store did he lay on it that he ordered the mes- 
senger to whisper it back into his ear again. Then by 
a nod of the head he has confirmed that it is right. Yes . 
before the assembled spectators of his death — all the 



142 THE GREAT WALL OF CHINA 

obstructing walls have been broken down, and on the 
spacious and loftily mounting open staircases stand in a 
ring the great princes of the Empire — before all these 
he has delivered his message. The messenger immedi- 
ately sets out on his journey; a powerful, an indefati- 
gable man, now pushing with his right arm, now with 
his left, he cleaves a way for himself through the 
throng; if he encounters resistance he points to his 
breast, where the symbol of the sun glitters; the way, 
too, is made easier for him than it would be for any 
other man. But the multitudes are so vast; their num- 
bers have no end. If he could reach the open fields, how 
fast he would fly, and soon doubtless you would hear 
the welcome hammering of his fists on your door. But 
instead how vainly does he wear out his strength; still he 
is only making his way through the chambers of the 
innermost palace; never will he get to the end of them; 
and if he succeeded in that nothing would be gained; 
he must fight his way next down the stair; and if he 
\mcceeded in that nothing would be gained; the courts 
would still have to be crossed; and after the courts the 
second outer palace; and once more stairs and courts; 
and once more another palace; and so on for thousands 
of years; and if at last he should burst through the outer- 
most gate — but never, never can that happen — the im- 
perial capital would lie before him, the center of the 
world, crammed to bursting with its own refuse. No- 
body could fight his way through here even with a mes- 
sage from a dead man. — But you sit at your window 
when evening falls and dream it to yourself. 

Just so, as hopelessly and as hopefully, do our people 



THE GREAT WALL OF CHINA I43 

regard the Emperor. They do not know what emperor 
is reigning, and there exist doubts regarding even the 
name of the dynasty. In school a great deal is taught 
about the dynasties with the dates of succession, but 
the universal uncertainty in this matter is so great that 
even the best scholars are drawn into it. Long-dead em- 
perors are set on the throne in our villages, and one that 
only lives in song recently had a proclamation of his 
read out by the priest before the altar. Battles that are 
old history are new to us, and one’s neighbor rushes 
in with a jubilant face to tell the news. The wives 
of the emperors, pampered and overweening, seduced 
from noble custom by wily courtiers, swelling with am- 
bition, vehement in their greed, uncontrollable in their ^ 
lust, practise their abominations ever anew. The more 
deeply they are buried in time the more glaring are 
the colors in which their deeds are painted, and with 
a loud cry of woe our village eventually hears how an 
Empress drank her husband’s blood in long draughts- 
thousands of years ago. 

Thus, then, do our people deal with departed em- 
perors, but the living ruler they confuse among the 
dead. If once, only once in a man’s lifetime, an imperial 
official on his tour of the provinces should arrive by 
chance at our village, make certain announcements in 
the name of the government, scrutinize the tax lists, 
examine the 3SK:hool children, enquire of the priest re- 
garding our doings and affairs, and then, before he 
steps into his litter, should sum up his impressions in 
verbose admonitions to the assembled commune — then 
a smile flits over every face, each man throws a stolen 



THE GREAT WALL OF CHINA 


144 

glance at his neighbor, and bends over his children so 
as not to be observed by the official. Why, they think to 
themselves, he’s speaking of a dead man as if he were 
alive, this Emperor of his died long ago, the dynasty is 
blotted out, the good official is having his joke with us, 
but we will behave as if we did not notice it, so as not 
to offend him. But we shall obey in earnest no one but 
our present ruler, for not to do so would be a crime. 
And behind the departing litter of the official there 
rises in might as ruler of the village some figure fortu* 
itously exalted from an urn already crumbled to dust. 

Similarly our people are but little affected by revolu- 
tions in the state or contemporary wars. I recall an in- 
cident in my youth. A revolt had broken out in a neigh- 
boring, but yet quite distant, province. What caused 
it I can no longer remember, nor is it of any importance 
now; occasions for revolt can be found there any day; 
the people are an excitable people. Well, one day a 
leaflet published by the rebels was brought to my fa- 
ther’s house by a beggar who had crossed that province. 
It happened to be a feast day, our rooms were filled with 
guests, the priest sat in the chief place and studied the 
sheet. Suddenly everybody started to laugh; in the con- 
fusion the sheet was torn; the beggar, who however 
had already received abundant alms, was driven out 
of the room with blows, the guests dispersed to enjoy 
the beautiful day. Why? The dialect of this neigh- 
boring province diflEers in some essential respects from 
ours, and this difference occurs also in certain turns of 
the written speech, which for us have an archaic char- 
acter. Hardly had the priest read out two lines before 



THE GREAT WALL OF CHINA 145 

we had already come to our decision. Ancient history 
told long ago, old sorrows long since healed. And though 
— so it seems to me in recollection — the gruesomeness o£ 
the living present was irrefutably conveyed by the beg- 
gar’s words, we laughed and shook our heads and re- 
fused to listen any longer. So eager are our people to 
obliterate the present. 

If from such appearances any one should draw the 
conclusion that in reality we have no Emperor, he would 
not be far from the truth. Over and over again it must 
be repeated: There is perhaps no people more faithful 
to the Emperor than ours in the south, but the Em- 
peror derives no advantage from our fidelity. True, the 
sacred dragon stands on the little column at the end 
of our village, and ever since the beginning of human 
memory it has breathed out its fiery breath in the direc" 
tion of Pekin in token of homage — but Pekin itself is 
far stranger to the people in our village than the next 
world. Can there really be a village where the houses 
stand side by side, covering all the fields for a greater 
distance than one can see from our hills, and can there 
be dense crowds of people packed between these houses 
day and night? We find it more difficult to picture such 
a city than to believe that Pekin and its Emperor are 
one, a cloud, say, peacefully voyaging beneath the sun 
in the course of the ages. 

Now the result of holding such opinions is a life on 
the whole free and unconstrained. By no means im- 
moral, however; hardly ever have I found in my trav- 
els such pure morals as in my native village. But yet a 
life that is subject to no contemporary law, and attend? 



146 THE GREAT WALL OF CHINA 

only to the exhortations and warnings which come to us 
from olden times. 

I guard against large generalizations, and do not 
assert that in all the countless villages in my province 
it is so, far less in all the five hundred provinces of China, 
Yet perhaps I may venture to assert on the basis of the 
many writings on this subject which I have read, as well 
as from my own observation — the building of the wall 
in particular, with its abundance of human material, 
provided a man of sensibility with the opportunity of 
traversing the souls of almost all the provinces — on the 
basis of all this, then, perhaps I may venture to assert 
that the prevailing attitude to the Emperor shows per- 
sistently and universally something fundamentally in 
common with that of our village. Now I have no wish 
whatever to represent this attitude as a virtue; on the 
contrary. True, the essential responsibility for it lies 
with the government, which in the most ancient empire 
in the world has not yet succeeded in developing, or has 
neglected to develop, the institution of the empire to 
such precision that its workings extend directly and 
unceasingly to the farthest frontiers of the land. On 
the other hand, however, there is also involved a certain 
feebleness of faith and imaginative power on the part 
of the people that prevents them from raising the em- 
pire out of its stagnation in Pekin and clasping it in all 
its palpable living reality to their own breasts, which 
yet desire nothing better than but once to feel that touch 
and then to die. 

This attitude then is certainly no virtue. All the more 
reiharkable is it that this very weakness should seem 



THE GREAT WALL OF CHINA I47 

to be one of the greatest unifying influences among 
our people; indeed, if one may dare to use the expres- 
sion, the very ground on which we live. To set about 
establishing a fundamental defect here would mean 
undermining not only our consciences, but, what is far 
worse, our feet. And for that reason I shall not proceed 
any further at this stage with my enquiry into these ques- 
tions. 



A Country Doctor 


{ WAS in great perplexity; I had to start on an urgent 
journey; a seriously ill patient was waiting for me in a 
village ten miles off; a thick blizzard of snow filled all 
the wide spaces between him and me; I had a gig, a light 
gig with big wheels, exactly right for our country roads; 
muffled in furs, my bag of instruments in my hand, I 
was in the courtyard all ready for the journey; but 
there was no horse to be had, no horse. My own horse 
had died in the night, worn out by the fatigues of this 
icy winter; my servant girl was now running round the 
village trying to borrow a horse; but it was hopeless, I 
knew it, and I stood there forlornly, with the snow gath- 
ering more and more thickly upon me, more and more 
unable to move. In the gateway the girl appeared, alone, 
and waved the lantern; of course, who would lend a 
horse at this time for such a journey? I strode through 
the courtyard once more; I could see no way out; in 
my confused distress I kicked at the dilapidated door 
of the year-long uninhabited pigsty. It flew open and 
flapped to and fro on its hinges, A steam and smell as 
of horses came out from it. A dim stable lantern was 
swinging inside from a rope. A man, crouching on his 

148 



A COUNTRY DOCTOR I49 

hams in that low space, showed an open blue-eyed face, 
“Shall I yoke up?” he asked, crawling out on all fours. I 
did not know what to say and merely stooped down to 
see what else was in the sty. The servant girl was stand- 
ing beside me. “You never know what you’re going to 
find in your own house,” she said, and we both laughed. 
“Hey there. Brother, hey there. Sister 1” called the 
groom, and two horses, enormous creatures with power- 
ful flanks, one after the other, their legs tucked close 
to their bodies, each well-shaped head lowered like a 
camel’s, by sheer strength of buttocking squeezed out 
through the door hole which they filled entirely. But 
at once they were standing up, their legs long and their 
bodies steaming thickly. “Give him a hand,” I said, and 
the willing girl hurried to help the groom with the 
harnessing. Yet hardly was she beside him when the 
groom clipped hold of her and pushed his face against 
hers. She screamed and fled back to me; on her cheek 
stood out in red the marks of two rows of teeth. “You 
brute,” I yelled in fury, “do you want a whipping?” but 
in the same moment reflected that the man was a 
stranger; that I did not know where he came from, 
and that of his own free will he was helping me out 
when everyone else had failed me. As if he knew my 
thoughts he took no offense at my threat but, still busied 
with the horses, only turned round once towards me. 
“Get in,” he said then, and indeed everything was 
ready. A magnificent pair of horses, I observed, such as 
I had never sat behind, and I climbed in happily. “But 
I’ll drive, you don’t know the way,” I said. “Of course,” 
said he, “I’m not coming with you anyway, I’m staying 



A COUNTRY DOCTOR 


X50 

with Rose/' “No/' shrieked Rose, fleeing into the house 
with a justified presentiment that her fate was inescapa- 
ble; I heard the door chain rattle as she put it up; I 
heard the key turn in the lock; I could see, moreover, 
how she put out the lights in the entrance hall and in 
further flight all through the rooms to keep herself from 
being discovered. “You're coming with me," I said to 
the groom, “or I won’t go, urgent as my journey is. I’m 
not thinking of paying for it by handing the girl over to 
you." “Gee up!” he said; clapped his hands; the gig 
whirled off like a log in a freshet; I could just hear the 
door of my house splitting and bursting as the groom 
charged at it and then I was deafened and blinded by 
a storming rush that steadily buffeted all my senses. But 
this only for a moment, since, as if my patient's farm- 
yard had opened out just before my courtyard gate, 
I was already there; the horses had come quietly to 
a standstill; the blizzard had stopped; moonlight all 
around; my patient’s parents hurried out of the house, 
his sister behind them; I was almost lifted out of the 
gig; from their confused ejaculations I gathered not a 
word; in the sickroom the air was almost unbreathable; 
the neglected stove was smoking; I wanted to push 
open a window; but first I had to look at my patient. 
Gaunt, without any fever, not cold, not warm, with 
vacant eyes, without a shirt, the youngster heaved him- 
self up from under the feather bedding, threw his arms 
round my neck, and whispered in my ear: “Doctor, 
let me die." I glanced round the room; no one had 
heard it; the parents were leaning forward in silence 
waiting for my verdict; the sister had set a chair for my 



A COUNTRY DOCTOR I5I 

handbag; I opened the bag and hunted among my in- 
struments; the boy kept clutching at me from his bed 
to remind me of his entreaty; I picked up a pair of 
tweezers, examined them in the candlelight and laid 
them down again. 'Tes/' I thought blasphemously, “in 
cases like this the gods are helpful, send the missing 
horse, add to it a second because of the urgency, and to 
crown everything bestow even a groom — ” And only now 
did I remember Rose again; what was I to do, how could 
I rescue her, how could I pull her away from under that 
groom at ten miles’ distance, with a team of horses I 
couldn’t control. These horses, now, they had some- 
how slipped the reins loose, pushed the windows open 
from outside, I did not know how; each of them had 
stuck a head in at a window and, quite unmoved by the 
startled cries of the family, stood eyeing the patient. 
“Better go back at once,” I thought, as if the horses 
were summoning me to the return journey, yet I per- 
mitted the patient’s sister, who fancied that I was dazed 
by the heat, to take my fur coat from me. A glass of rum 
was poured out for me, the old man clapped me on the 
shoulder, a familiarity justified by this ofiEer of his treas- 
ure. I shook my head; in the narrow confines of the old 
man’s thoughts I felt ill; that was my only reason for 
refusing the drink. The mother stood by the bedside 
and cajoled me towards it; I yielded, and, while one of 
the horses whinnied loudly to the ceiling, laid my head 
to the boy’s breast, which shivered under my wet beard. 
I confirmed what I already knew; the boy was quite 
sound, something a little wrong with his circulation,, 
saturated with coffee by his solicitous mother, but sound 



^52 A COUNTRY DOCTOR 

and best turned out of bed with one shove. I am no 
world reformer and so I let him lie. I was the district 
doctor and did my duty to the uttermost, to the point 
where it became almost too much. I was badly paid and 
yet generous and helpful to the poor. I had still to see 
that Rose was all right, and then the boy might have 
his way and I wanted to die too. What was I doing there 
in that endless winter! My horse was dead, and not a 
single person in the village would lend me another. I 
had to get my team out of the pigsty; if they hadn’t 
chanced to be horses I should have had to travel with 
swine. That was how it was. And I nodded to the family. 
They knew nothing about it, and, had they known, 
would not have believed it. To write prescriptions is 
easy, but to come to an understanding with people is 
hard. Well, this should be the end of my visit, I had 
once more been called out needlessly, I was used to that, 
the whole district made my life a torment with my night 
bell, but that I should have to sacrifice Rose this time as 
well, the pretty girl who had lived in my house for years 
almost without my noticing her — that sacrifice was too 
much to ask, and I had somehow to get it reasoned out 
in my head with the help of what craft I could muster, 
in order not to let fly at this family, which with the best 
(vill in the world could not restore Rose to me. But as 
I shut my bag and put an arm out for my fur coat, the 
family meanwhile standing together, the father sniffing 
at the glass of rum in his hand, the mother, apparently 
disappointed in me — ^why, what do people expect? — 
biting her lips with tears in her eyes, the sister fluttering 
a blood-soaked towel, I was somehow ready to admit 



A COUNTRY DOCTOR 153 

conditionally that the boy might be ill after all. I went 
towards him, he welcomed me smiling as if I were bring- 
ing him the most nourishing invalid broth — ah, now 
both horses were whinnying together; the noise, I sup- 
pose, was ordained by heaven to assist my examination 
of the patient — and this time I discovered that the boy 
was indeed ill. In his right side, near the hip, was an 
open wound as big as the palm of my hand. Rose-red, in 
many variations of shade, dark in the hollows, lighter 
at the edges, softly granulated, with irregular clots of 
blood, open as a surface mine to the daylight. That 
was how it looked from a distance. But on a closer in- 
spection there was another complication. I could not 
help a low whistle of surprise. Worms, as thick and as 
long as my little finger, themselves rose-red and blood- 
spotted as well, were wriggling from their fastness in 
the interior of the wound towards the light, with small 
white heads and many little legs. Poor boy, you were 
past helping. I had discovered your great wound; this 
blossom in your side was destroying you. The family 
was pleased; they saw me busying myself; the sister told 
the mother, the mother the father, the father told sev- 
eral guests who were coming in, through the moon- 
light at the open door, walking on tiptoe, keeping their 
balance with outstretched arms. '‘Will you save me?’* 
whispered the boy with a sob, quite blinded by the 
life within his wound. That is what people are like in 
my district. Always expecting the impossible from the 
doctor. They have lost their ancient beliefs; the parson 
sits at home and unravels his vestments, one after an- 
other; but the doctor is supposed to be omnipotent 



A COUNTRY DOCTOR 


m 

with his merciful surgeon’s hand. Well, as it pleases 
them; I have not thrust my services on them; if they 
misuse me for sacred ends, I let that happen to me too; 
what better do I want, old country doctor that I am, 
bereft of my servant girl! And so they came, the family 
and the village elders, and stripped my clothes oflE me; 
a school choir with the teacher at the head of it stood 
before the house and sang these words to an utterly sim- 
ple tune: 

Strip his clothes off, then he’ll heal us. 

If he doesn’t, kill him dead! 

Only a doctor, only a doctor. 

Then my clothes were ofE and I looked at the people 
quietly, my fingers in my beard and my head cocked 
to one side. I was altogether composed and equal to 
the situation and remained so, although it was no help 
to me, since they now took me by the head and feet 
and carried me to the bed. They laid me down in it 
next to the wall, on the side of the wound. Then 
they all left the room; the door was shut; the singing 
stopped; clouds covered the moon; the bedding was 
warm around me; the horses’ heads in the open win- 
dows wavered like shadows. ''Do you know,” said a 
voice in my ear, "I have very little confidence in you. 
Why, you were only blown in here, you didn’t come on 
your own feet. Instead of helping me, you’re cramping 
me on my deathbed. What I’d like best is to scratch 
your eyes out.” “Right,” I said, “it is a shame. And yet 
I am a doctor. What am I to do? Believe me, it is not 



A COUNTRY DOCTOR 


^55 

too easy for me either.*’ ‘‘Am I supposed to be content 
with this apology? Oh, I must be, I can’t help it. I al- 
ways have to put up with things. A fine wound is all I 
brought into the world; that was my sole endowment.” 
“My young friend,” said I, “your mistake is: you have 
not a wide enough view. I have been in all the sick- 
rooms, far and wide, and I tell you: your wound is not 
so bad. Done in a tight corner with two strokes of the 
ax. Many a one proffers his side and can hardly hear 
the ax in the forest, far less that it is coming nearer to 
him.” “Is that really so, or are you deluding me in my 
fever?” “It is really so, take the word of honor of an ofi 
ficial doctor.” And he took it and lay still. But now it 
was time for me to think of escaping. The horses were 
still standing faithfully in their places. My clothes, my 
fur coat, my bag were quickly collected; I didn’t want 
to waste time dressing; if the horses raced home as they 
had come, I should only be springing, as it were, out of 
this bed into my own. Obediently a horse backed away 
from the window; I threw my bundle into the gig; the 
fur coat missed its mark and was caught on a hook only 
by the sleeve. Good enough. I swung myself onto the 
horse. With the reins loosely trailing, one horse barely 
fastened to the other, the gig swaying behind, my fur 
coat last of all in the snow. “Gee up!” I said, but there 
was no galloping; slowly, like old men, we crawled 
through the snowy wastes; a long time echoed behind 
us the new but faulty song of the children: 

O be joyful, all you patients, 

The doctor’s laid in bed beside you! 



156 A COUNTRY DOCTOR 

Never shall I reach home at this rate; my flourishing 
practice is done for; my successor is robbing me, but 
in vain, for he cannot take my place; in my house the 
disgusting groom is raging; Rose is his victim; I do not 
want to think about it any more. Naked, exposed to 
the frost of this most unhappy of ages, with an earthly 
vehicle, unearthly horses, old man that I am, I wander 
astray. My fur coat is hanging from the back of the gig, 
but I cannot reach it, and none of my limber pack of pa- 
tients lifts a finger. Betrayed! Betrayed! A false alarm 
on the night bell once answered — it cannot be made 
good, not ever. 



A Common Confusion 


A COMMON EXPERIENCE, resulting in a common con- 
fusion. A has to transact important business with B in 
H. He goes to H for a preliminary interview, accom- 
plishes the journey there in ten minutes, and the jour- 
ney back in the same time, and on returning boasts to 
his family of his expedition. Next day he goes again to 
H, this time to settle his business finally. As that by all 
appearances will require several hours, A leaves very 
early in the morning. But although all the accessory 
circumstances, at least in A’s estimation, are exactly 
the same as the day before, it takes him ten hours this 
time to reach H. When he arrives there quite exhausted 
in the evening he is informed that B, annoyed at his 
absence, had left half an hour before to go to A’s vil- 
lage, and that they must have passed each other on the 
road. A is advised to wait. But in his anxiety about his 
business he sets off at once and hurries home. 

This time he achieves the journey, without paying 
any particular attention to the fact, exactly in a second. 
At home he learns that B had arrived quite early, im- 
mediately after A’s departure, indeed that he had met 
A on the threshold and reminded him of his business; 

157 



158 A COMMON CONFUSION 

but A had replied that he had no time to spare, he 
must go at once. 

In spite of this incomprehensible behavior of A, 
however, B had stayed on to wait for A’s return. It is 
true, he had asked several times whether A was not 
back yet, but he was still sitting up in A’s room. Over- 
joyed at the opportunity of seeing B at once and ex- 
plaining everything to him, A rushes upstairs. He is 
almost at the top, when he stumbles, twists a sinew, 
and almost fainting with the pain, incapable even of 
uttering a cry, only able to moan faintly in the dark- 
ness, he hears B — impossible to tell whether at a great 
distance or quite near him — stamping down the stairs 
in a violent rage and vanishing for good. 



The New Advocate 


We have a new advocate. Dr. Bucephalus. There is lit- 
tie in his appearance to remind you that he was once 
Alexander of Macedon’s battle charger. Of course, if 
you know his story, you are aware of something. But 
even a simple usher whom I saw the other day on the 
front steps of the Law Courts, a man with the profes- 
sional appraisal of the regular small punter in a race- 
course, was running an admiring eye over the advocate 
as he mounted the marble steps with a high action that 
made them ring beneath his feet. 

In general the Bar approves the admission of 
Bucephalus. With astonishing insight people tell them- 
selves that, modern society being what it is, Buceph- 
alus is in a difficult position, and therefore, considering 
also his importance in the history of the world, he de. 
serves at least a friendly reception. Nowadays — it can 
not be denied — ^there is no Alexander the Great. There 
are plenty of men who know how to murder people; 
the skill needed to reach over a banqueting table and 
pink a friend with a lance is not lacking; and for many 
Macedonia is too confining, so that they curse Philip, 
the father — but no one, no one at all, can blaze a trail 


159 



l60 THE NEW ADVOCATE 

to India. Even in his day the gates of India were be- 
yond reach, yet the King’s sword pointed the way to 
them. Today the gates have receded to remoter and loft- 
ier places; no one points the way; many carry swords, 
but only to brandish them, and the eye that tries to fol- 
low them is confused. 

So perhaps it is really best to do as Bucephalus has 
done and absorb oneself in law books. In the quiet 
lamplight, his flanks unhampered by the tliighs of a 
rider, free and far from the clamor of battle, he reads 
and turns the pages of our ancient tomes. 



An Old Manuscript 


It looks as if much had been neglected in our coun- 
try's system of defense. We have not concerned our- 
selves with it until now and have gone about our daily 
work; but things that have been happening recently 
begin to trouble us. 

I have a cobbler’s workshop in the square that lies 
before the Emperor’s palace. Scarcely have I taken my 
shutters down, at the first glimmer of dawn, when I see 
armed soldiers already posted in the mouth of every 
street opening on the square. But these soldiers are not 
ours, they are obviously nomads from the North. In 
some way that is incomprehensible to me they have 
pushed right into the capital, although it is a long way 
from the frontier. At any rate, here they are; it seems 
that every morning there are more of them. 

As is their nature, they camp under the open sky, for 
they abominate dwelling houses. They busy themselves 
sharpening swords, whittling arrows and practicing 
horsemanship. This peaceful square, which was always 
kept so scrupulously clean, they have made literally 
into a stable. We do try every now and then to run out 
of our shops and clear away at least the worst of the 

i6i 



AN OLD MANUSCRIPT 


i6s 

filth, but this happens less and less often, for the labor 
is in vain and brings us besides into danger of falling 
under the hoofs of the wild horses or of being crippled 
with lashes from the whips. 

Speech with the nomads is impossible. They do not 
know our language, indeed they hardly have a lan- 
guage of their own. They communicate with each other 
much as jackdaws do. A screeching as of jackdaws is al- 
ways in our ears. Our way of living and our institutions 
they neither understand nor care to understand. And 
so they are unwilling to make sense even out of our sign 
language. You can gesture at them till you dislocate 
your jaws and your wrists and still they will not have 
understood you and will never understand. They often 
make grimaces; then the whites of their eyes turn up 
and foam gathers on their lips, but they do not mean 
anything by that, not even a threat; they do it because 
it is their nature to do it. Whatever they need, they 
take. You cannot call it taking by force. They grab at 
something and you simply stand aside and leave them 
to it. 

From my stock, too, they have taken many good 
articles. But I cannot complain when I see how the 
butcher, for instance, suflEers across the street. As soon 
as he brings in any meat the nomads snatch it all from 
him and gobble it up. Even their horses devour flesh; 
often enough a horseman and his horse are lying sid( 
by side, both of them gnawing at the same joint, one 
at either end. The butcher is nervous and does not 
care to stop his deliveries of meat. We understand that, 



AN Ol.D manuscript 


163 

however, and subscribe money to keep him going. If 
the nomads got no meat, who knows what they might 
think of doing; who knows anyhow what they may 
think of, even though they get meat every day. 

Not long ago the butcher thought he might at least 
spare himself the trouble of slaughtering, and so one 
morning he brought along a live ox. But he will never 
dare to do that again. I lay for a whole hour flat on the 
floor at the back of my workshop with my head mitSled 
in all the clothes and rugs and pillows I had, simply to 
keep from hearing the bellowing of that ox, which the 
nomads were leaping on from all sides, tearing morsels 
out of its living flesh with their teeth. It had been quiet 
for a long time before I risked coming out; they weie 
lying overcome round the remains of the carcass like 
drunkards round a wine cask. 

This was the occasion when I fancied I actually saw 
the Emperor himself at a window of the palace; usu- 
ally he never enters these outer rooms but spends all 
his time in the innermost garden; yet on this occasion 
he was standing, or so at least it seemed to me, at one 
of the windows, watching with bent head the goings on 
before his residence. 

“What is going to happen?” we all ask ourselves. 
“How long can we endure this burden and torment? 
The Emperor’s palace has drawn the nomads here but 
does not know how to drive them away again. The gate 
stays shut; the guards, who used to be always marching 
out and in with ceremony, keep close behind barred 
windows. It is left to us artisans and tradesmen to save 



164 AN OLD MANUSCRIPT 

our country; but we are not equal to such a task; nor 
have we ever claimed to be capable of it. This is a mis- 
understanding of some kind; and it will be the ruin of 
as/’ 



A Fratricide 


The evidence shows that this is how the murder was 
committed: 

Schmar, the murderer, took up his post about nine 
o’clock one night in clear moonlight by the corner 
where Wese, his victim, had to turn from the street 
where his office was into the street he lived in. 

The night air was shivering cold. Yet Schmar was 
wearing only a thin blue suit; the jacket was unbut 
toned, too. He felt no cold; besides, he was moving 
about all the time. His weapon, half a bayonet and half 
a kitchen knife, he kept firmly in his grasp, quite naked. 
He looked at the knife against the light of the moon; 
the blade glittered; not enough for Schmar; he struck 
it against the bricks of the pavement till the sparks 
flew; regretted that, perhaps; and to repair the damage 
drew it like a violin bow across his boot sole while he 
bent forward, standing on one leg, and listened both 
to the whetting of the knife on his boot and for any 
sound out of the fateful side street. 

Why did Pallas, the private citizen who was watch- 
ing it all from his window near by in the second story, 
permit it to happen? Unriddle the mysteries of hu- 



i66 


A FRATRICIDE 


man nature! With his collar turned up, his dressing 
gown girt round his portly body, he stood looking down, 
shaking his head. 

And five houses farther along, on the opposite side 
of the street, Mrs. Wese, with a fox-fur coat over her 
nightgown, peered out to look for her husband who 
was lingering unusually late tonight. 

At last there rang out the sound of the doorbell be- 
fore Wese’s office, too loud for a doorbell, right over 
the town and up to heaven, and Wese, the industrious 
nightworker, issued from the building, still invisible 
in that street, only heralded by the sound of the bell; 
at once the pavement registered his quiet footsteps. 

Pallas bent far forward; he dared not miss anything. 
Mrs. Wese, reassured by the bell, shut her window with 
a clatter. But Schmar knelt down; since he had no other 
parts of his body bare, he pressed only his face and his 
hands against the pavement; where everything else was 
freezing, Schmar was glowing hot. 

At the very corner dividing the two streets Wese 
paused; only his walking stick came round into the 
other street to support him. A sudden whim. The night 
sky invited him, with its dark blue and its gold. Un- 
knowing, he gazed up at it, unknowing he lifted his hat 
and stroked his hair; nothing up there drew together 
in a pattern to interpret the immediate future for him; 
everything stayed in its senseless, inscrutable place. 
In itself it was a highly reasonable action that Wese 
should walk on, but he walked on to Schmar's knife. 



A FRATRICIDE 


167 

You will never see Julia again!” And right into the 
throat and left into the throat and a third time deep 
into the belly stabbed Schmar’s knife. Water rats, slit 
open, give out such a sound as came from Wese. 

“Done,” said Schmar, and pitched the knife, now 
superfluous blood-stained ballast, against the nearest 
house front. “The bliss of murder! The relief, the soar- 
ing ecstasy from the shedding of another’s blood! Wese, 
old nightbird, friend, alehouse crony, you are oozing 
away into the dark earth below the street. Why aren’t 
you simply a bladder of blood so that I could stamp on 
you and make you vanish into nothingness? Not all we 
want comes true, not all the dreams that blossomed 
have borne fruit; your solid remains lie here, already 
indifferent to every kick. What’s the good of the dumb 
question you are asking?” 

Pallas, choking on the poison in his body, stood at 
the double-leafed door of his house as it flew open. 
“Schmar! Schmar! I saw it all, I missed nothing.” Pallas 
and Schmar scrutinized each other. The result of the 
scrutiny satisfied Pallas; Schmar came to no conclusion. 

Mrs. Wese, with a crowd of people on either side, 
came rushing up, her face grown quite old with the 
shock. Her fur coat swung open, she collapsed on top 
of Wese; the nightgowned body belonged to Wese, the 
fur coat spreading over the couple like the smooth turf 
of a grave belonged to the crowd. 

Schmar, fighting down with difficulty the last of his 
nausea, pressed his mouth against the shoulder of the 
policeman who, stepping lightly, led him away. 



A Report to an Academy 


Honored Members of the Academy! 

You have done me the honor of inviting me to give 
your Academy an account of the life I formerly led as 
an ape. 

I regret that I cannot comply with your request to the 
extent you desire. It is now nearly five years since 1 
was an ape, a short space of time, perhaps, according 
to the calendar, but an infinitely long time to gallop 
through at full speed, as I have done, more or less ac- 
companied by excellent mentors, good advice, applause 
and orchestral music, and yet essentially alone, since 
all my escorters, to keep the image, kept well off the 
course. I could never have achieved what I have done 
had I been stubbornly set on clinging to my origins, to 
the remembrances of my youth. In fact, to give up be- 
ing stubborn was the supreme cqmmandment I laid 
upon myself; free ape as I was, I submitted myself to 
that yoke. In revenge, however, my memory of the past 
has closed the door against me more and more. I could 
have returned at first, had human beings allowed it, 
through an archway as wide as the span of heaven over 
the earth, but as I spurred myself on in my forced ca- 

168 



A REPORT TO AN ACADEMY 169 

reer, the opening narrowed and shrank behind me; I 
felt more comfortable in the world of men and fitted it 
better; the strong wind that blew after me out of my 
past began to slacken; today it is only a gentle puff of 
air that plays around my heels; and the opening in the 
distance, through which it comes and through which I 
once came myself, has grown so small that, even if my 
strength and my will power sufficed to get me back to 
it, I should have to scrape the very skin from my body 
to crawl through. To put it plainly, much as I like ex- 
pressing myself in images, to put it plainly; your life 
as apes, gentlemen, insofar as something of. that kind 
lies behind you, cannot be farther removed from you 
than mine is from me. Yet everyone on earth feels a 
tickling at the heels; the small chimpanzee and the great 
Achilles alike. 

But to a lesser extent I can perhaps meet your de- 
mand, and indeed I do so with the greatest pleasure. 
The first thing I learned was to give a handshake; a 
handshake betokens frankness; well, today, now that I 
stand at the very peak of my career, I hope to add frank- 
ness in words to the frankness of that first handshake. 
What I have to tell the Academy will contribute noth- 
ing essentially new, and will fall far behind Vhat you 
have asked of me and what with the best will in the 
world I cannot communicate — none the less, it should 
indicate the line an erstwhile ape has had to follow in 
entering and establishing himself in the world of men. 
Yet I could not risk putting into words even such insig- 
nificant information as I am going to give you it I were 
not quite sure of myself and if my position on all th< 



1^0 A REPORT TO AN ACADEMY 

great variety stages of the civilized world had not be- 
come quite unassailable. 

I belong to the Gold Coast. For the story of my cap- 
ture I must depend on the evidence of others. A hunt- 
ing expedition sent out by the firm of Hagenbeck — by 
the way, I have drunk many a bottle of good red wine 
since then with the leader of that expedition — had 
taken up its position in the bushes by the shore when I 
came down for a drink at evening among a troop of 
apes. They shot at us; I was the only one that was hit; 
I was hit in two places. 

Once in the cheek; a slight wound; but it left a large, 
naked, red scar which earned me the name of Red 
Peter, a horrible name, utterly inappropriate, which 
only some ape could have thought of, as if the only dif- 
ference between me and the performing ape Peter, who 
died not so long ago and had some small local reputa- 
tion, were the red mark on my cheek. This by the way. 

The second shot hit me below the hip. It was a severe 
wound; it is the cause of my limping a little to this day. 
I read an article recently by one of the ten thousand 
windbags who vent themselves concerning me in the 
newspapers, saying: my ape nature is not yet quite un- 
der control; the proof being that when visitors come to 
see me, I have a predilection for taking down my trou- 
sers to show them where the shot went in. The hand 
which wrote that should have its fingers shot away one 
by one. As for me, I can take my trousers down before 
anyone if I like; you would find nothing but a well- 
groomed fur and the scar made — let me be particular 
in the dioice of a word for this particular purpose, to 



A REPORT TO AN ACADEMY 

avoid misunderstanding — the scar made by a wanton 
shot. Everything is open and aboveboard; there is noth- 
ing to conceal; when the plain truth is in question, great 
minds discard the niceties of refinement. But if the 
writer of the article were to take down his trousers be- 
fore a visitor that would be quite another story, and I 
will let it stand to his credit that he does not do it. In 
return, let him leave me alone with his delicacy! 

After these two shots I came to myself — and this is 
where my own memories gradually begin — between 
decks in the Hagenbeck steamer, inside a cage. It was 
not a four-sided barred cage; it was only a three-sided 
cage nailed to a locker; the locker made the fourth side 
of it. The whole construction was too low for me to 
stand up in and too narrow to sit down in. So I had to 
squat with my knees bent and trembling all the time, 
and also, since probably for a time I wished to see no 
one, and to stay in the dark, my face was turned towards 
the locker while the bars of the cage cut into my flesh 
behind. Such a method of confining wild beasts is sup- 
posed to have its advantages during the first days of 
captivity, and out of my own experiences I cannot deny 
that from the human point of view this is really the 
case. 

But that did not occur to me then. For the first time 
in my life I could see no way out; at least no direct way 
out; directly in front of me was the locker, board fitted 
close to board. True, there was a gap running right 
through the boards which I greeted with the blissful 
howl of ignorance when I first discovered it, but the 
hole was not even wide enough to stick one s tail 



172 A REPORT TO AN ACADEMY 

through and not all the strength of an ape could enlarge 
it. 

I am supposed to have made uncommonly little 
noise, as I was later informed, from which the conclu- 
sion was drawn that I would either soon die or if I man- 
aged to survive the first critical period would be very 
amenable to training. I did survive this period. Hope- 
lessly sobbing, painfully hunting for fleas, apathetically 
licking a cocoanut, beating my skull against the locker, 
sticking out my tongue at anyone who came near me — 
that was how I filled in time at first in my new life. But 
over and above it all only the one feeling: no way out. 
Of course ■what I felt then as an ape I can represent now 
only in human terms, and therefore I misrepresent it, 
but although I cannot reach back to the truth of the old 
ape life, there is no doubt that it lies somewhere in the 
direction I have indicated. 

Until then I had had so many ways out of everything, 
and now I had none. I was pinned down. Had I been 
nailed down, my right to free movement would not 
have been lessened. Why so? Scratch your flesh raw be- 
tween your toes, but you won’t find the answer. Press 
yourself against the bar behind you till it nearly cuts 
you in two, you won’t find the answer. I had no way out 
but I had to devise one, for without it I could not live. 
All the time facing that locker — I should certainly have 
perished. Yet as far as Hagenbeck was concerned, the 
place for apes was in front of a locker — well, then, I had 
to stop being an ape. A fine, clear train of thought, 
which I must have constructed somehow with my belly, 
since apes think with their bellies. 



A REPORT TO AN ACADEMY 175 

I fear that perhaps you do not quite understand what 
I mean by “way out.’’ I use the expression in its fullest 
and most popular sense. I deliberately do not use the 
word “freedom.” I do not mean the spacious feeling of 
freedom on all sides. As an ape, perhaps, I knew that, 
and I have met men who yearn for it. But for my part 
I desired such freedom neither then nor now. In pass- 
ing: may I say that all too often men are betrayed by 
the word freedom? And as freedom is counted among 
the most sublime feelings, so the corresponding disillu^ 
sionment can be also sublime. In variety theaters I have 
often watched, before my turn came on, a couple of 
acrobats performing on trapezes high in the roof. They 
swung themselves, they rocked to and fro, they sprang 
into the air, they floated into each other’s arms, one 
hung by the hair from the teeth of the other. “And 
that too is human freedom,” I thought, “self-controlled 
movement.” What a mockery of holy Mother Nature! 
Were the apes to see such a spectacle, no theater walls 
could stand the shock of their laughter. 

No, freedom was not what I wanted. Only a way out; 
right or left, or in any direction; I made no other de- 
mand; even should the way out prove to be an illusion; 
the demand was a small one, the disappointment could 
be no bigger. To get out somewhere, to get out! Only 
not to stay motionless with raised arms, crushed against 
a wooden wall. 

Today I can see it clearly; without the most profound 
inward calm I could never have found my way out. And 
indeed perhaps I owe all that I have become to the 
calm that settled within me after my first few days in 



174 A REPORT TO AN ACADEMY 

the ship. And again for that calmness it was the ship’s 
crew I had to thank. 

They were good creatures, in spite of everything. I 
find it still pleasant to remember the sound of their 
heavy footfalls which used to echo through my half- 
dreaming head. They had a habit of doing everything 
as slowly as possible. If one of them wanted to rub his 
eyes, he lifted a hand as if it were a drooping weight. 
Their jests were coarse, but hearty. Their laughter had 
always a gruff bark in it that sounded dangerous but 
meant nothing. They always had something in their 
mouths to spit out and did not care where they spat it. 
They always grumbled that they got fleas from me; yet 
they were not seriously angry about it; they knew that 
my fur fostered fleas, and that fleas jump; it was a sim- 
ple matter of fact to them. When they were off duty 
some of them often used to sit down in a semicircle 
round me; they hardly spoke but only grunted to each 
other; smoked their pipes, stretched out on lockers; 
smacked their knees as soon as I made the slightest 
movement; and now and then one of them would take 
a stick and tickle me where I liked being tickled. If I 
were to be invited today to take a cruise on that ship 
I should certainly refuse the invitation, but just as cer- 
tainly the memories I could recall between its decks 
would not all be hateful. 

The calmness I acquired among these people kept 
me above all from trying to escape. As I look back now, 
it seems to me I must have had at least an inkling that 
I had to find a way out or die, but that my way out 
could not be reached through flight. 1 cannot tell now 



A REPORT TO AN ACADEMY 175 

whether escape was possible, but I believe it must have 
been; for an ape it must always be possible. With my ^ 
teeth as they are today I have to be careful even in sim- 
ply cracking nuts, but at that time I could certainly 
have managed by degrees to bite through the lock of my 
cage. I did not do it. What good would it have done me? 
As soon as I had poked out my head I should have been 
caught again and put in a worse cage; or I might have 
slipped among the other animals without being noticed, 
among the pythons, say, who were opposite me, and so 
breathed out my life in their embrace; or supposing I 
had actually succeeded in sneaking out as far as the 
deck and leaping overboard, I should have rocked for 
a little on the deep sea and then been drowned. Desper- 
ate remedies. I did not think it out in this human way, 
but under the influence of my surroundings I acted as 
if I had thought it out. 

I did not think things out; but I observed everything 
quietly. I watched these men go to and fro, always the 
same faces, the same movements, often it seemed to me 
there was only the same man. So this man or these men 
walked about unimpeded. A lofty goal faintly dawned 
before me. No one promised me that if I became like 
them the bars of my cage would be taken away. Such 
promises for apparently impossible contingencies are 
not given. But if one achieves the impossible, the prom- 
ises appear later retrospectively precisely where one 
had looked in vain for them before. Now, these men 
in themselves had no great attraction for me. Had I 
been devoted to the aforementioned idea of freedom, I 
should certainly have preferred the deep sea to the way 



176 A. REPORT TO AN ACADEMY 

out that suggested itself in the heavy faces of these men. 
At any rate, I watched them for a long time before I 
even thought of such things; indeed, it was only the 
mass weight of my observations that impelled me in 
the right direction. 

It was so easy to imitate these people. I learned to spit 
in the very first days. We used to spit in each other’s 
faces; the only ditference was that I licked my face clean 
afterwards and they did not. I could soon smoke a pipe 
like an old hand; and if I also pressed my thumb into 
the bowl of the pipe, a roar of appreciation went up 
between-decks; only it took me a very long time to 
understand the difference between a full pipe and an 
empty one. 

My worst trouble came from the schnapps bottle. The 
smell of it revolted me; I forced myself to it as best I 
could; but it took weeks for me to master my repulsion. 
This inward conflict, strangely enough, was taken more 
seriously by the crew than anything else about me. I 
cannot distinguish the men from each other in my rec- 
ollection, but there was one of them who came again 
and again, alone or with friends, by day, by night, at 
all kinds of hours; he would post himself before me 
with the bottle and give me instructions. He could not 
understand me, he wanted to solve the enigma of my 
being. He would slowly uncork the bottle and then look 
at me to see if I had followed him; I admit that I always 
watched him with wildly eager, too eager attention; 
such a student of humankind no human teacher ever 
found on earth. After the bottle was uncorked he lifted 
it to his mouth; I followed it with my eyes right up to 



A REPORT TO AN ACADEMY I77 

his jaws; he would nod, pleased with me, and set the 
bottle to his lips; I, enchanted with my gradual enlight- 
enment, squealed and scratched myself comprehem 
sively wherever scratching was called for; he rejoiced, 
tilted the bottle and took a drink; I, impatient and 
desperate to emulate him, befouled myself in my cage, 
which again gave him great satisfaction; and then, hold 
ing the bottle at arm’s length and bringing it up with 
a swing, he would empty it at one draught, leaning back 
at an exaggerated angle for my better instruction. I, ex- 
hausted by too much effort, could follow him no farther 
and hung limply to the bars, while he ended his theo- 
retical exposition by rubbing his belly and grinning. 

After theory came practice. Was I not already quite 
exhausted by my theoretical instruction? Indeed I was; 
utterly exhausted. That was part of my destiny. And 
yet I would take hold of the proffered bottle as well as 
I was able; uncork it, trembling; this successful action 
would gradually inspire me with new energy; I would 
lift the bottle, already following my original model al- 
most exactly; put it to my lips and — ^and then throw it 
down in disgust, utter disgust, although it was empty 
and filled only with the smell of the spirit, throw it 
down on the floor in disgust. To the sorrow of my 
teacher, to the greater sorrow of myself; neither of usf 
being really comforted by the fact that I did not forget 
even though I had thrown away the bottle, to rub my 
belly most admirably and to grin. 

Far too often my lesson ended in that way. And to 
the credit of my teacher, he was not angry; sometimes 
indeed he would hold his burning pipe against my fur. 



lyS A REPORT TO AN ACADEMY 

until it began to smolder in some place I could not eas- 
ily reach, but then he would himself extinguish it with 
his own kind, enormous hand; he was not angry with 
me, he perceived that we were both fighting on the 
same side against the nature of apes and that I had the 
more difficult task. 

What a triumph it was then both for him and for me, 
when one evening before a large circle of spectators — 
perhaps there was a celebration of some kind, a gramo- 
phone was playing, an officer was circulating among the 
crew — when on this evening, just as no one was looking, 
I took hold of a schnapps bottle that had been carelessly 
left standing before my cage, uncorked it in the best 
style, while the company began to watch me with 
mounting attention, set it to my lips without hesitation, 
with no grimace, like a professional drinker, with roll- 
ing eyes and full throat, actually and truly drank it 
empty; then threw the bottle away, not this time in de- 
spair but as an artistic performer; forgot, indeed, to rub 
my belly; but instead of that, because I could not help 
it, because my senses were reeling, called a brief and 
unmistakable '‘Hallo!” breaking into human speech, 
and with this outburst broke into the human commu- 
nity, and felt its echo: “Listen, he's talking!” like a ca- 
ress over the whole of my sweat-drenched body. 

I repeat: there was no attraction for me in imitating 
human beings; I imitated them because I needed a way 
out, and for no other reason. And even that triumph of 
mine did not achieve much. I lost my human voice again 
at once; it did not come back for months; my aver- 
sion for the schnapps bottle returned again with even 



A REPORT TO AN ACADEMY 179 

greater force. But the line I was to follow had in any 
case been decided, once for all. 

When I was handed over to my first trainer in Ham- 
burg I soon realized that there were two alternatives 
before me: the Zoological Gardens or the variety stage. 

I did not hesitate. I said to myself: do your utmost to get 
on to the variety stage; the Zoological Gardens means 
only a new cage; once there, you are done for. 

And so I learned things, gentlemen. Ah, one learns 
when one has to; one learns when one needs a way out; 
one learns at all costs. One stands over oneself with a 
whip; one flays oneself at the slightest opposition. My 
ape nature fled out of me, head over heels and away, so 
that my first teacher was almost himself turned into an 
ape by it, had soon to give up teaching and was taken 
away to a mental hospital. Fortunately he was soon let 
out again. 

But I used up many teachers, indeed, several teachers 
at once. As I became more confident of my abilities, as 
the public took an interest in my progress and my fu- 
ture began to look bright, I engaged teachers for myself, 
established them in five communicating rooms and took 
lessons from them all at once by dint of leaping from 
one room to the other. 

That progress of mine! How the rays of knowledge 
penetrated from all sides into my awakening brain! I ^ 
do not deny it: I found it exhilarating. But I must also 
confess: I did not overestimate it, not even then, much 
less now. With an effort which up till now has never 
been repeated I managed to reach the cultural level of 
an average European. In itself that might be nothing to 



l8o A REPORT TO AN ACADEMY 

speak of, but it is something insofar as it has helped me 
out of my cage and opened a special way out for me, 
the way of humanity. There is an excellent idiom: to 
fight one’s way through the thick of things; that is what 
I have done, I have fought through the thick of things. 
There was nothing else for me to do, provided alv/ays 
that freedom was not to be my choice. 

As I look back over my development and survey what 
I have achieved so far, I do not complain, but I am not 
complacent either. With my hands in my trousers pock- 
ets, my bottle of wine on the table, I half lie and half 
sit in my rocking chair and gaze out of the window: if a 
visitor arrives, I receive him with propriety. My man- 
ager sits in the anteroom; when I ring, he comes and 
listens to what I have to say. Nearly every evening I 
give a performance, and I have a success which could 
hardly be increased. When I come home late at night 
from banquets, from scientific receptions, from social 
gatherings, there sits waiting for me a half-trained lit- 
tle chimpanzee and I take comfort from her as apes do. 
By day I cannot bear to see her; for she has the insane 
look of the bewildered half-broken animal in her eye; 
no one else sees it, but I do, and I cannot bear it. On 
the whole, at any rate, I have achieved what I set out 
to achieve. But do not tell me that it was not worth the 
trouble. In any case, I am not appealing for any man’s 
verdict, I am only imparting knowledge, I am only 
making a report. To you also, honored Members of the 
Academy, I have only made a report. 



The Hunter Gracchus 


Two BOYS were sitting on the harbor wall playing with 
dice. A man was reading a newspaper on the steps o£ 
the monument, resting in the shadow of a hero who 
was flourishing his sword on high. A girl was filling hei 
bucket at the fountain. A fruitseller was lying beside 
his scales, staring out to sea. Through the vacant win- 
dow and door openings of a cafe one could see two men 
quite at the back drinking their wine. The proprietor 
was sitting at a table in front and dozing. A bark was 
silently making for the little harbor, as if borne by 
invisible means over the water. A man in a blue blouse 
climbed ashore and drew the rope through a ring. Be- 
hind the boatman two other men in dark coats with sil- 
ver buttons carried a bier, on which, beneath a great 
flower-patterned tasselled silk cloth, a man was appar- 
ently lying. 

Nobody on the quay troubled about the newcomers; 
even when they lowered the bier to wait for the boat- 
man, who was still occupied with his rope, nobody went 
nearer, nobody asked them a question, nobody accorded 
them an inquisitive glance. 

The pilot was still further detained by a woman who, 



i82 the hunter GRACCHUS 

a child at her breast, now appeared with loosened hair 
on the deck of the boat. Then he advanced and indi- 
cated a yellowish two-storeyed house that rose abruptly 
on the left beside the sea; the bearers took up their bur- 
den and bore it to the low but gracefully pillared door. 
A little boy opened a window just in time to see the 
party vanishing into the house, then hastily shut the 
window again. The door too was now shut; it was of 
black oak, and very strongly made. A flock of doves 
which had been flying round the belfry alighted in the 
street before the house. As if their food were stored 
within, they assembled in front of the door. One of 
them flew up to the first storey and pecked at the win- 
dow-pane. They were bright-hued, well-tended, beauti- 
ful birds. The woman on the boat flung grain to them 
in a wide sweep; they ate it up and flew across to the 
woman. 

A man in a top hat tied with a band of crepe now de- 
scended one of the narrow and very steep lanes that led 
to the harbor. He glanced round vigilantly, everything 
seemed to displease him, his mouth twisted at the sight 
of some offal in a corner. Fruit skins were lying on the 
steps of the monument; he swept them off in passing 
with his stick. He rapped at the house door, at the same 
time taking his top hat from his head with his black- 
gloved hand. The door was opened at once, and some 
fifty little boys appeared in two rows in the long entry- 
hall, and bowed to him. 

The boatman descended the stairs, greeted the gen- 
tleman in black, conducted, him up to the first storey, 
'ed him round the bright and elegant loggia which en- 



THE HUNTER GRACCHUS 183 

circled the courtyard, and both of them entered, while 
the boys pressed after them at a respectful distance, a 
cool spacious room looking towards the back, from 
whose window no habitation, but only a bare, blackish 
gi'ey rocky wall was to be seen. The bearers were busied 
in setting up and lighting several long candles at the 
head of the bier, yet these did not give light, but only 
scared away the shadows which had been immobile till 
then, and made them flicker over the walls. The cloth 
covering the bier had been thrown back. Lying on it 
was a man with wildly matted hair, who looked some- 
what like a hunter. He lay without motion and, it 
seemed, without breathing, his eyes closed; yet only his 
trappings indicated that this man was probably dead. 

The gentleman stepped up to the bier, laid his hand 
on the brow of the man lying upon it, then kneeled 
down and prayed. The boatman made a sign to the 
bearers to leave the room; they went out, drove away 
the boys who had gathered outside, and shut the door. 
But even that did not seem to satisfy the gentleman; he 
glanced at the boatman; the boatman understood, and 
vanished through a side door into the next room. At 
once the man on the bier opened his eyes, turned his 
face painfully towards the gentleman, and said: “Who 
are you?’' Without any mark of surprise the gentleman 
rose from his kneeling posture and answered: “The 
Burgomaster of Riva.” 

The man on the bier nodded, indicated a chair with 
a feeble movement of his arm, and said, after the Bur- 
gomaster had accepted his invitation: “I knew that, of 
course, Burgomaster, but in the first moments of re- 



i 84 the hunter gracchus 

turning consciousness I always forget, everything goes 
round before my eyes, and it is best to ask about any- 
thing even if I know. You too probably know that I am 
the hunter Gracchus.'' 

“Certainly," said the Burgomaster. “Your arrival was 
announced to me during the night. We had been asleep 
for a good while. Then towards midnight my wife 
cried: ‘Salvatore’ — that's my name — ‘look at that dove 
at the window.' It was really a dove, but as big as a cock. 
It flew over me and said in my ear: ‘Tomorrow the 
dead hunter Gracchus is coming; receive him in the 
name of the city.' " 

The hunter nodded and licked his lips with the tip 
of his tongue: “Yes, the doves flew here before me. But 
do you believe. Burgomaster, that I shall remain in 
Riva?" 

“I cannot say that yet," replied the Burgomaster. 
“Are you dead?" 

“Yes," said the hunter, “as you see. Many years ago, 
yes, it must be a great many years ago, I fell from a prec- 
ipice in the Black Forest — that is in Germany — when I 
was hunting a chamois. Since then I have been dead." 

“But you are alive too," said the Burgomaster. 

“In a certain sense," said the hunter, “in a certain 
sense I am alive too. My death ship lost its way; a wrong 
turn of the wheel, a moment's absence of mind on the 
pilot’s part, a longing to turn aside towards my lovely 
native country, I cannot tell what it was; I only know 
this, that I remained on earth and that ever since my 
ship has sailed earthly waters. So I, who asked for noth- 



THE HUNTER GRACCHUS 185 

ing better than to live among my mountains, travel 
after my death through all the lands of the earth/' 

“And you have no part in the other world?" asked 
the Burgomaster, knitting his brow. 

“I am forever," replied the hunter, “on the great 
stair that leads up to it. On that infinitely wide and 
spacious stair I clamber about, sometimes up, some- 
times down, sometimes on the right, sometimes on the 
left, always in motion. The hunter has been turned into 
a butterfly. Do not laugh." 

“I am not laughing," said the Burgomaster in self- 
defense. 

“That is very good of you," said the hunter. “I am 
always in motion. But when I make a supreme flight 
and see the gate actually shining before me I awaken 
presently on my old ship, still stranded forlornly in 
some earthly sea or other. The fundamental error of 
my one-time death grins at me as I lie in my cabin. 
Julia, the wife of the pilot, knocks at the door and 
brings me on my bier the morning drink of the land 
whose coasts we chance to be passing. I lie on a wooden 
pallet, I wear — it cannot be a pleasure to look at me — ^ 
filthy winding sheet, my hair and beard, black tinged 
with grey, have grown together inextricably, my limbs 
are covered with a great flower-patterned woman's 
shawl with long fringes. A sacramental candle stands at 
my head and lights me. On the wall opposite me is a 
little picture, evidently of a Bushman who is aiming 
his spear at me and taking cover as best he can behind 
a beautifully painted shield. On shipboard one is often 



i86 


THE HUNTER GRACCHUS 


a prey to stupid imaginations, but that is the stupidest 
of them all. Otherwise my wooden case is quite empty. 
Through a hole in the side wall come in the warm airs 
of the southern night, and I hear the water slapping 
against the old boat. 

‘'I have lain here ever since the time when, as the 
hunter Gracchus living in the Black Forest, I followed 
a chamois and fell from a precipice. Everything hap- 
pened in good order. I pursued, I fell, bled to death in 
a ravine, died, and this ship should have conveyed me 
to the next world. I can still remember how gladly I 
stretched myself out on this pallet for the first time. 
Never did the mountains listen to such songs from me 
as these shadowy walls did then. 

had been glad to live and I was glad to die. Before 
I stepped aboard, I joyfully flung away my wretched 
load of ammunition, my knapsack, my hunting rifle 
that I had always been proud to carry, and I slipped 
into my winding sheet like a girl into her marriage 
dress. I lay and waited. Then came the mishap.” 

terrible fate,” said the Burgomaster, raising his 
hand defensively. *‘And you bear no blame for it?” 

''None,” said the hunter. "I was a hunter; was there 
any sin in that? I followed my calling as a hunter in 
the Black Forest, where there were still wolves in those 
days. I lay in ambush, shot, hit my mark, flayed the skins 
from my victims: was there any sin in that? My labors 
were blessed. 'The great hunter of the Black Forest' was 
the name I was given. Was there any sin in that?” 

"I am not called upon to decide that,” said the Bun 



THE HUNTER GRACCHUS 187 

gomaster, ''but to me also there seems to be no sin in 
such things. But, then, whose is the guilt?’* 

“The boatman’s,” said the hunter. “Nobody will read 
what I say here, no one will come to help me; even i£ all 
the people were commanded to help me, every door and 
window would remain shut, everybody would take to 
bed and draw the bedclothes over his head, the whole 
earth would become an inn for the night. And there is 
sense in that, for nobody knows of me, and if anyone 
knew he would not know where I could be found, and 
if he knew where I could be found, he would not know 
how to deal with me, he would not know how to help 
me. The thought of helping me is an illness that has 
to be cured by taking to one’s bed. 

“I know that, and so I do not shout to summon help, 
even though at moments — ^when I lose control over my- 
self, as I have done just now, for instance — I think seri- 
ously of it. But to drive out such thoughts I need only 
look round me and verify where I am, and — I can safely 
assert — have been for hundreds of years.” 

“Extraordinary,” said the Burgomaster, “extraordi- 
nary. — ^And now do you think of staying here in Riva 
with us?” 

“I think not,” said the hunter with a smile, and, to 
excuse himself, he laid his hand on the Burgomaster’s 
knee. "lam here, more than that I do not know, further 
than that I cannot go. My ship has no rudder, and it is 
driven by the wind that blows in the undermost regions 
of death.” 



A Hunger Artist 


During these last decades the interest in professional 
fasting has markedly diminished. It used to pay very 
well to stage such great performances under one’s own 
management, but today that is quite impossible. We 
live in a different world now. At one time the whole 
town took a lively interest in the hunger artist; from 
day to day of his fast the excitement mounted; every- 
body wanted to see him at least once a day; there were 
people who bought season tickets for the last few days 
and sat from morning till night in front of his small 
barred cage; even in the nighttime there were visiting 
hours, when the whole effect was heightened by torch 
flares; on fine days the cage was set out in the open air, 
and then it was the children’s special treat to see the 
hunger artist; for their elders he was often just a joke 
that happened to be in fashion, but the children stood 
open-mouthed, holding each other’s hands for greater 
security, marveling at him as he sat there pallid in black 
tights, with his ribs sticking out so prominently, not 
even on a seat but down among straw on the ground, 
sometimes giving a courteous nod, answering questions 
with a constrained smile, or perhaps stretching an arm 

188 



A HUNGER ARTIST 


189 

through the bars so that one might feel how thin it was, 
and then again withdrawing deep into himself, paying 
no attention to anyone or anything, not even to the all- 
important striking of the clock that was the only piece 
of furniture in his cage, but merely staring into vacancy 
with half-shut eyes, now and then taking a sip from a 
tiny glass of water to moisten his lips. 

Besides casual onlookers there were also relays 
of permanent watchers selected by the public, usually 
butchers, strangely enough, and it was their task to 
watch the hunger artist day and night, three of them 
at a time, in case he should have some secret recourse 
to nourishment. This was nothing but a formality, in- 
stituted to reassure the masses, for the initiates knew 
well enough that during his fast the artist would never 
in any circumstances, not even under forcible compul- 
sion, swallow the smallest morsel of food; the honor of 
his profession forbade it. Not every watcher, of course, 
was capable of understanding this, there were often 
groups of night watchers who were very lax in carrying 
out their duties and deliberately huddled together in a 
retired corner to play cards with great absorption, obvi- 
ously intending to give the hunger artist the chance of 
a little refreshment, which they supposed he could draw 
from some private hoard. Nothing annoyed the artist 
more than such watchers; they made him miserable; 
they made his fast seem unendurable; sometimes he 
mastered his feebleness sufficiently to sing during their 
watch for as long as he could keep going, to show them 
how unjust their suspicions were. But that was of little 
use; they only wondered at his cleverness in being able 



igO A HUNGER ARTIST 

to fill his mouth even while singing. Much more to his 
taste were the watchers who sat close up to the bars, 
who were not content with the dim night lighting of 
the hall but focused him in the full glare of the electric 
pocket torch given them by the impresario. The harsh 
light did not trouble him at all. In any case he could 
never sleep properly, and he could always drowse a lit- 
tle, whatever the light, at any hour, even when the hall 
was thronged with noisy onlookers. He was quite happy 
at the prospect of spending a sleepless night with such 
watchers: he was ready to exchange jokes with them, to 
tell them stories out of his nomadic life, anything at 
all to keep them awake and demonstrate to them again 
that he had no eatables in his cage and that he was 
fasting as not one of them could fast. But his happiest 
moment was when the morning came and an enormous 
breakfast was brought them, at his expense, on which 
they flung themselves with the keen appetite of healthy 
men after a weary night of wakefulness. Of course there 
were people who argued that this breakfast was an un- 
fair attempt to bribe the watchers, but that was going 
rather too far, and when they were invited to take on a 
night’s vigil without a breakfast, merely for the sake of 
the cause, they made themselves scarce, although they 
stuck stubbornly to their suspicions. 

Such suspicions, anyhow, were a necessary accompani- 
ment to the profession of fasting. No one could possibly 
watch the hunger artist continuously, day and night, 
and so no one could produce first-hand evidence that 
the fast had really been rigorous and continuous; only 
the artist himself could know that; he was therefore 



A HUNGER ARTIST 


19^ 

bound to be the sole completely satisfied spectator of 
his own fast. Yet for other reasons he was never satis- 
fied; it was not perhaps mere fasting that had brought 
him to such skeleton thinness that many people had re- 
gretfully to keep away from his exhibitions, because the 
sight of him was too much for them, perhaps it was dis- 
satisfaction with himself that had worn him down. For 
he alone knew, what no other initiate knew, how easy 
it was to fast. It was the easiest thing in the world. He 
made no secret of this, yet people did not believe him; 
at the best they set him down as modest, most of them, 
however, thought he was out for publicity or else was 
some kind of cheat who found it easy to fast because he 
had discovered a way of making it easy, and then had 
the impudence to admit the fact, more or less. He 
had to put up with all that, and in the course of time had 
got used to it, but his inner dissatisfaction always ran- 
kled, and never yet, after any term of fasting — this must 
be granted to his credit — had he left the cage of his own 
free will. The longest period of fasting was fixed by his 
impresario at forty days, beyond that term he was not 
allowed to go, not even in great cities, and there was 
good reason for it, too. Experience had proved that foi 
about forty days the interest of the public could be stim- 
ulated by a steadily increasing pressure of advertise- 
ment, but after that the town began to lose interest, 
sympathetic support began notably to fall off; there 
were of course local variations as between one town and 
another or one country and another, but as a general 
rule forty days marked the limit. So on the fortieth day 
the flower-bedecked cage was opened, enthusiastic spec 



A HUNGER ARTIST 


^92 

tators jfilled the hall, a military band played, two doc- 
tors entered the cage to measure the results of the 
fast, which were announced through a megaphone, and 
finally two young ladies appeared, blissful at having 
been selected for the honor, to help the hunger artist 
down the few steps leading to a small table on which 
was spread a carefully chosen invalid repast. And at 
this very moment the artist always turned stubborn. 
True, he v/ould entrust his bony arms to the out- 
stretched helping hands of the ladies bending over him, 
but stand up he would not. Why stop fasting at this 
particular moment, after forty days of it? He had held 
out for a long time, an inimitably long time; why stop 
now, when he was in his best fasting form, or rather, 
not yet quite in his best fasting form? Why should he 
be cheated of the fame he would get for fasting longer, 
for being not only the record hunger artist of all time, 
which presumably he was already, but for beating his 
own record by a performance beyond human imagina- 
tion, since he felt that there were no limits to his capac- 
ity for fasting? His public pretended to admire him so 
much, why should it have so little patience with him; 
if he could endure fasting longer, why shouldn’t the 
public endure it? Besides, he was tired, he was comfort- 
able sitting in the straw, and now he was supposed to 
lift himself to his full height and go down to a meal the 
very thought of which gave him a nausea that only the 
presence of the ladies kept him from betraying, and 
even that with an effort. And he looked up into the eyes 
of the ladies who were apparently so friendly and in 
reality so cruel, and shook his head, which felt too heavy 



A HUNGER ARTIST I95 

on its strengthless neck. But then there happened yet 
again what always happened. The impresario came for- 
ward, without a word — for the band made speech impos- 
sible — lifted his arms in the air above the artist, as if 
inviting Heaven to look down upon its creature here 
in the straw, this suffering martyr, which indeed he was, 
although in quite another sense; grasped him round 
the emaciated waist, with exaggerated caution, so that 
the frail condition he was in might be appreciated; and 
committed him to the care of the blenching ladies, not 
without secretly giving him a shaking so that his legs 
and body tottered and swayed. The artist now submit- 
ted completely; his head lolled on his breast as if it had 
landed there by chance; his body was hollowed out; his 
legs in a spasm of self-preservation clung close to each 
other at the knees, yet scraped on the ground as if it 
were not really solid ground, as if they were only try- 
ing to find solid ground; and the whole weight of his 
body, a featherweight after all, relapsed onto one of the 
ladies, who, looking round for help and panting a little 
— this post of honor was not at all what she had expected 
it to be — first stretched her neck as far as she could to 
keep her face at least free from contact with the artist, 
then finding this impossible, and her more fortunate 
companion not coming to her aid but merely holding 
extended on her own trembling hand the little bunch 
of knucklebones that was the artist’s, to the great delight 
of the spectators burst into tears and had to be replaced 
by an attendant who had long been stationed in readr 
ness. Then came the food, a little of which the impre- 
sario managed to get between the artist’s lips, while he 



A HUNGER ARTIST 


194 

sat in a kind o£ hal£-£ainting trance, to the accompani- 
ment o£ cheer£ul patter designed to distract the public’s 
attention £rom the artist’s condition; a£ter that, a toast 
was drunk to the public, supposedly prompted by a 
whisper £rom the artist in the impresario’s ear; the 
band confirmed it with a mighty flourish, the spectators 
melted away, and no one had any cause to be dissatis- 
fied with the proceedings, no one except the hunger 
artist himself, he only, as always. 

So he lived for many years, with small regular inter- 
vals of recuperation, in visible glory, honored by the 
world, yet in spite of that troubled in spirit, and all the 
more troubled because no one would take his trouble 
seriously. What comfort could he possibly need? What 
more could he possibly wish for? And if some good- 
natured person, feeling sorry for him, tried to console 
him by pointing out that his melancholy was probably 
caused by fasting, it could happen, especially when he 
had been fasting for some time, that he reacted with an 
outburst of fury and to the general alarm began to 
shake the bars of his cage like a wild animal. Yet 
the impresario had a way of punishing these outbreaks 
which he rather enjoyed putting into operation. He 
would apologize publicly for the artist’s behavior, which 
was only to be excused, he admitted, because of the ir- 
ritability caused by fasting; a condition hardly to be 
understood by well-fed people; then by natural transi- 
tion he went on to mention the artist’s equally incom- 
prehensible boast that he could fast for much longer 
than he was doing; he praised the high ambition, the 
good will, the great self-denial undoubtedly implicit in 



A HUNGER ARTIST 195* 

such a Statement; and then quite simply countered it 
by bringing out photographs, which were also on sale 
to the public, showing the artist on the fortieth day of 
a fast lying in bed almost dead from exhaustion. This 
perversion of the truth, familiar to the artist though it 
was, always unnerved him afresh and proved too much 
for him. What was a consequence of the premature end- 
ing of his fast was here presented as the cause of itl To 
fight against this lack of understanding, against a whole 
world of non-understanding, was impossible. Time and 
again in good faith he stood by the bars listening to the 
impresario, but as soon as the photogi*aphs appeared 
he always let go and sank with a groan back on to his 
straw, and the reassured public could once more come 
close and gaze at him. 

A few years later when the witnesses of such scenes 
called them to mind, they often failed to understand 
themselves at all. For meanwhile the aforementioned 
change in public interest had set in; it seemed to hap- 
pen almost overnight; there may have been profound 
causes for it, but who was going to bother about that; 
at any rate the pampered hunger artist suddenly found 
himself deserted one fine day by the amusement seek^ 
ers, who went streaming past him to other more favored 
attractions. For the last time the impresario hurried 
him over half Europe to discover whether the old inter- 
est might still survive here and there; all in vain; every- 
where, as if by secret agreement, a positive revulsion 
from professional fasting was in evidence. Of course it 
could not really have sprung up so suddenly as all that, 
and many premonitory symptoms which had not been 



A HUNGER ARTIST 


196 

sufficiently remarked or suppressed during the rush and 
glitter o£ success now came retrospectively to mind, but 
it was now too late to take any countermeasures. Fasting 
would surely come into fashion again at some future 
date, yet that was no comfort for those living in the pres- 
ent. What, then, was the hunger artist to do? He had 
been applauded by thousands in his time and could 
hardly come down to showing himself in a street booth 
at village fairs, and as for adopting another profession, 
he was not only too old for that but too fanatically de- 
voted to fasting. So he took leave of the impresario, his 
partner in an unparalleled career, and hired himself 
to a large circus; in order to spare his own feelings he 
avoided reading the conditions of his contract. 

A large circus with its enormous traffic in replacing 
and recruiting men, animals and apparatus can always 
find a use for people at any time, even for a hunger ar- 
tist, provided of course that he does not ask too much, 
and in this particular case anyhow it was not only the 
artist who was taken on but his famous and long-known 
name as well; indeed considering the peculiar nature of 
his performance, which was not impaired by advancing 
age, it could not be objected that here was an artist past 
his prime, no longer at the height of his professional 
skill, seeking a refuge in some quiet corner of a circus; 
on the contrary, the hunger artist averred that he could 
fast as well as ever, which was entirely credible; he even 
alleged that if he were allowed to fast as he liked, and 
this was at once promised him without more ado, he 
could astound the world by establishing a record never 
i yet achieved, a statement which certainly provoked a 



A HUNGER ARTIST 


smile among the other professionals, since it left out of 
account the change in public opinion, which the hun. 
ger artist in his zeal conveniently forgot. 

He had not, however, actually lost his sense of the 
real situation and took it as a matter of course that he 
and his cage should be stationed, not in the middle of 
the ring as a main attraction, but outside, near the ani- 
mal cages, on a site that was after all easily accessible. 
Large and gaily painted placards made a frame for the 
cage and announced what was to be seen inside it. When 
the public came thronging out in the intervals to see 
the animals, they could hardly avoid passing the hunger 
artist’s cage and stopping there for a moment, perhaps 
they might even have stayed longer had not those press- 
ing behind them in the narrow gangway, who did not 
understand why they should be held up on their way 
towards the excitements of the menagerie, made it 
impossible for anyone to stand gazing quietly for any 
length of time. And that was the reason why the hunger 
artist, who had of course been looking forward to these 
visiting hours as the main achievement of his life, be- 
gan instead to shrink from them. At first he could hardly 
wait for the intervals; it was exhilarating to watch the 
crowds come streaming his way, until only too soon — 
not even the most obstinate self-deception, clung to al- 
most consciously, could hold out against the fact — the 
conviction was borne in upon him that these people, 
most of them, to judge from their actions, again and 
again, without exception, were all on their way to the 
menagerie. And the first sight of them from the dis- 
tance remained the best. For when they reached his 



A HUNGER ARTIST 


198 

cage he was at once deafened by the storm of shouting 
and abuse that arose from the two contending factions, 
which renewed themselves continuously, of those who 
wanted to stop and stare at him — he soon began to dis- 
like them more than the others — not out of real interest 
but only out of obstinate self-assertiveness, and those 
who wanted to go straight on to the animals. When the 
first great rush was past, the stragglers came along, and 
these, whom nothing could have prevented from stop- 
ping to look at him as long as they had breath, raced 
past with long strides, hardly even glancing at him, in 
their haste to get to the menagerie in time. And all too 
rarely did it happen that he had a stroke of luck, when 
some father of a family fetched up before him with his 
children, pointed a finger at the hunger artist and ex- 
plained at length what the phenomenon meant, telling 
stories of earlier years when he himself had watched 
similar but much more thrilling performances, and the 
children, still rather uncomprehending, since neither 
inside nor outside school had they been sufficiently pre- 
pared for this lesson — ^what did they care about fasting? 

■ — ^yet showed by the brightness of their intent eyes that 
new and better times might be coming. Perhaps, said 
the hunger artist to himself many a time, things would 
be a little better if his cage were set not quite so near 
the menagerie. That made it too easy for people to make 
their choice, to say nothing of what he suffered from 
the stench of the menagerie, the animals’ restlessness by 
night, the carrying past of raw lumps of flesh for the 
beasts of prey, the roaring at feeding times, which de- 
pressed him continually. But he did not dare to lodge 



A HUNGER ARTIST igg 

a complaint with the management; after all, he had the 
animals to thank for the troops of people who passed 
his cage, among whom there might always be one here 
and there to take an interest in him, and who could tell 
where they might seclude him if he called attention to 
his existence and thereby to the fact that, strictly speak- 
ing, he was only an impediment on the way to the me- 
nagerie. 

A small impediment, to be sure, one that grew stead- 
ily less. People grew familiar with the strange idea that 
they could be expected, in times like these, to take an 
interest in a hunger artist, and with this familiarity the 
verdict went out against him. He might fast as much as 
he could, and he did so; but nothing could save him now, 
people passed him by. Just try to explain to anyone the 
art of fasting! Anyone who has no feeling for it cannot 
be made to understand it. The fine placards grew dirty 
and illegible, they were torn down; the little notice 
board telling the number of fast days achieved, which 
at first was changed carefully every day, had long stayed 
at the same figure, for after the first few weeks even this 
small task seemed pointless to the staff; and so the artist 
simply fasted on and on, as he had once dreamed 
of doing, and it was no trouble to him, just as he had 
always foretold, but no one counted the days, no one, 
not even the artist himself, knew what records he was 
already breaking, and his heart grew heavy. And when 
once in a time some leisurely passer-by stopped, made 
merry over the old figure on the board and spoke of 
swindling, that was in its way the stupidest lie ever in- 
vented by indifference and inborn malice, since it was 



500 


A HUNGER ARTIST 


not the hunger artist who was cheating; he was working 
honestly, but the world was cheating him of his reward. 

Many more days went by, however, and that too came 
to an end. An overseer’s eye fell on the cage one day 
and he asked the attendants why this perfectly good 
stage should be left standing there unused with dirty 
straw inside it; nobody knew, until one man, helped out 
by the notice board, remembered about the hunger ar- 
tist. They poked into the straw with sticks and found 
him in it. “Are you still fasting?” asked the overseer. 
“When on earth do you mean to stop?” “Forgive me, 
everybody,” whispered the hunger artist; only the over- 
seer, who had his ear to the bars, understood him. “Of 
course,” said the overseer, and tapped his forehead with 
a finger to let the attendants know what state the man 
was in, “we forgive you.” “I always wanted you to ad- 
mire my fasting,” said the hunger artist. “We do admire 
it,” said the overseer, affably. “But you shouldn’t ad- 
mire it,” said the hunger artist. “Well, then we don’t 
admire it,” said the overseer, “but why shouldn’t we ad- 
mire it?” “Because I have to fast, I can’t help it,” said 
the hunger artist. “What a fellow you are,” said the 
overseer, “and why can’t you help it?” “Because,” said 
the hunger artist, lifting his head a little and speaking, 
with his lips pursed, as if for a kiss, right into the over- 
seer’s ear, so that no syllable might be lost, “because I 
couldn’t find the food I liked. If I had found it, believe 
me, I should have made no fuss and stuffed myself like 
you or anyone else.” These were his last words, but in 



A HUNGER ARTIST 


201 


his dimming eyes remained the firm though no longer 
proud persuasion that he was still continuing to fast. 

“Well, clear this out now!” said the overseer, and they 
buried the hunger artist, straw and all. Into the cage 
they put a young panther. Even the most insensitive felt 
it refreshing to see this wild creature leaping around 
the cage that had so long been dreary. The panther was 
all right. The food he liked was brought him without 
hesitation by the attendants; he seemed not even to miss 
his freedom; his noble body, furnished almost to the 
bursting point with all that it needed, seemed to carry 
freedom around with it too; somewhere in his jaws it 
seemed to lurk; and the joy of life streamed with such 
ardent passion from his throat that for the onlookers it 
was not easy to stand the shock of it. But they braced 
themselves, crowded round the cage, and did not want 
-aver to move away. 



Investigations of a Dog 


How MUCH my life has changed, and yet how un- 
changed it has remained at bottom! When I think back 
and recall the time when I was still a member of the 
canine community, sharing in all its preoccupations, a 
dog among dogs I find on closer examination that from 
the very beginning I sensed some discrepancy, some little 
maladjustment, causing a slight feeling of discomfort 
which not even the most decorous public functions could 
eliminate; more, that sometimes, no, not sometimes, but 
very often, the mere look of some fellow-dog of my own 
circle that I was fond of, the mere look of him, as if I 
had just caught it for the first time, would fill me with 
helpless embarrassment and fear, even with despair. I 
tried to quiet my apprehensions as best I could; friends, 
to whom I divulged them, helped me; more peaceful 
times came — times, it is true, in which these sudden sur- 
prises were not lacking, but in which they were accepted 
with more philosophy, fitted into my life with more 
philosophy, inducing a certain melancholy and lethargy, 
it may be, but nevertheless allowing me to carry on as a 
somewhat cold, reserved, shy and calculating, but ail 
things considered normal enough dog. How, indeed, 


S02 



INVESTIGATIONS OF A DOG 


203 

without these intervals of convalescence, could I have 
reached the age that I enjoy at present; how could I have 
fought my way through to the serenity with which I 
contemplate the terrors of youth and endure the terrors 
of age; how could I have come to the point where I am 
able to draw the consequences of my admittedly un- 
happy, or, to put it more moderately, not very happy 
position, and live almost entirely in accordance with 
them? Solitary and withdrawn, with nothing to occupy 
me save my hopeless but, as far as I am concerned, indis' 
pensable little investigations, that is how I live; yet in 
my distant isolation I have not lost sight of my people, 
news often penetrates to me, and now and then I even 
let news of myself reach them. The others treat me with 
respect but do not understand my way of life; yet they 
bear me no grudge, and even young dogs whom I some- 
times see passing in the distance, a new generation of 
whose childhood I have only a vague memory, do not 
deny me a reverential greeting. 

For it must not be assumed that, for all my peculiari- 
ties, which lie open to the day, I am in the least exempt 
from the laws of my species. Indeed when I reflect on 
it — ^and I have time and disposition and capacity enough 
for that — I see that dogdom is in every way a marvelous 
institution. Apart from us dogs there are all sorts of 
creatures in the world, wretched, limited, dumb crea- 
tures who have no language but mechanical cries; many 
of us dogs study them, have given them names, try to 
help them, educate them, uplift them, and so on. For 
my part I am quite indifferent to them except when 
they try to disturb me, I confuse them with one another. 



204 INVESTIGATIONS OF A DOG 

I ignore them. But one thing is too obvious to have es- 
caped me; namely how little inclined they are, com- 
pared with us dogs, to stick together, how silently and 
unfamiliarly and with what a curious hostility they pass 
each other by, how mean are the interests that suffice 
to bind them together for a little in ostensible union, 
and how often these very interests give rise to hatred and 
conflict. Consider us dogs, on the other hand! One can 
safely say that we all live together in a literal heap, all 
of us, different as we are from one another on account 
of numberless and profound modifications which have 
arisen in the course of time. All in one heap! We are 
drawn to each other and nothing can prevent us from 
satisfying that communal impulse; all our laws and in- 
stitutions, the few that I still know and the many that I 
have forgotten, go back to this longing for the greatest 
bliss we are capable of, the warm comfort of being to- 
gether. But now consider the other side of the picture. 
No creatures to my knowledge live in such wide disper- 
sion as we dogs, none have so many distinctions of class, 
of kind, of occupation, distinctions too numerous to 
review at a glance; we, whose one desire is to stick to- 
gether — ^and again and again we succeed at transcendent 
moments in spite of everything — ^we above all others are 
compelled to live separated from one another by strange 
vocations that are often incomprehensible even to our 
canine neighbors, holding firmly to laws that are not 
those of the dog world, but are actually directed against 
it. How baffling these questions are, questions on which 
one would prefer not to touch — I understand that stand- 
point too, even better than my own — ^and yet questions 



INVESTIGATIONS OF A DOG 205 

to which I have completely capitulated. Why do I not do 
as the others: live in harmony with my people and accept 
in silence whatever disturbs the harmony, ignoring it 
as a small error in the great account, always keeping in 
mind the things that bind us happily together, not those 
that drive us again and again, as though by sheer force, 
out of our social circle? 

I can recall an incident in my youth; I was at the time 
in one of those inexplicable blissful states of exaltation 
which every one must have experienced as a child; I was 
still quite a puppy, everything pleased me, everything 
was my concern. I believed that great things were going 
on around me of which I was the leader and to which I 
must lend my voice, things which must be wretchedly 
thrown aside if I did not run for them and wag my tail 
for them — childish fantasies that fled with riper years. 
But at the time their power was very great. I was com- 
pletely under their spell, and presently something actu- 
ally did happen, something so extraordinary that it 
seemed to justify my wild expectations. In itself it was 
nothing very extraordinary, for I have seen many such 
things, and more remarkable things too, often enough 
since, but at the time it struck me with all the force of 
a first impression, one of those impressions which can 
never be erased and influence much of one’s later con- 
duct. I encountered, in short, a little company of dogs, 
or rather I did not encounter them, they appeared be- 
fore me. Before that I had been running along in dark- 
ness for some time, filled with a premonition of great 
things — a premonition that may well have been delusive, 
for I always had it. I had run in darkness for a long time, 



2o6 investigations of a dog 

up and down, blind and deaf to everything, led on by 
nothing but a vague desire, and now I suddenly came to 
a stop with the feeling that I was in the right place, and 
looking up saw that it was bright day, only a little hazy, 
and everywhere a blending and confusion of the most 
intoxicating smells; I greeted the morning with an un- 
certain barking, when — as if I had conjured them up — 
out of some place of darkness, to the accompaniment of 
terrible sounds such as I had never heard before, seven 
dogs stepped into the light. Had I not distinctly seen 
that they were dogs and that they themselves brought 
the sound of them — though I could not recognize how 
they produced it — I would have run away at once; but 
as it was I stayed. At that time I still knew hardly any- 
thing of the creative gift for music with which the ca- 
nine race alone is endowed, it had naturally enough es- 
caped my but slowly developing powers of observation; 
for though music had surrounded me as a perfectly nat- 
ural and indispensable element of existence ever since 
I was a suckling, an element which nothing impelled 
me to distinguish from the rest of existence, my elders 
had drawn my attention to it only by such hints as were 
suitable for a childish understanding; all the more 
astonishing, then, indeed devastating, were these seven 
great musical artists to me. They did not speak, they did 
not sing, they remained, all of them, silent, almost de- 
terminedly silent; but from the empty air they conjured 
music. Everything was music, the lifting and setting 
down of their feet, certain turns of the head, their run- 
ning and their standing still, the positions they took up 
in relation to one another, the symmetrical patterns 



INVESTIGATIONS OF A DOG S07 

which they produced by one dog setting his front paws 
on the back of another and the rest following suit until 
the first bore the weight of the other six, or by all lying 
fiat on the ground and going through complicated con- 
certed evolutions; and none made a false move, not even 
the last dog, though he was a little unsure, did not al- 
ways establish contact at once with the others, some- 
times hesitated, as it were, on the stroke of the beat, but 
yet was unsure only by comparison with the superb 
sureness of the others, and even if he had been much 
more unsure, indeed quite unsure, would not have been 
able to do any harm, the others, great masters all of 
them, keeping the rhythm so unshakably. But it is too 
much to say that I even saw them, that I actually even 
saw them. They appeared from somewhere, I inwardly 
greeted them as dogs, and although I was profoundly 
confused by the sounds that accompanied them, yet they 
were dogs nevertheless, dogs like you and me; I regarded 
them by force of habit simply as dogs I had happened to 
meet on my road, and felt a wish to approach them and 
exchange greetings; they were quite near too, dogs much 
older than I, certainly, and not of my woolly, long- 
haired kind, but yet not so very alien in size and shape, 
indeed quite familiar to me, for I had already seen many 
such or similar dogs; but while I was still involved in 
these reflections the music gradually got the upper hand, 
literally knocked the breath out of me and swept me far 
away from those actual little dogs, and quite against my 
will, while I howled as if some pain were being inflicted 
upon me, my mind could attend to nothing but this 
blast of music which seemed to come from all sides, from 



2o8 investigations of a dog 

the heights, from the deeps, from everywhere, seizing 
the listener by the middle, overwhelming him, crushing 
him, and over his swooning body still blowing fanfares 
so near that they seemed far away and almost inaudible. 
And then a respite came, for one was already too ex- 
hausted, too annulled, too feeble to listen any longer; a 
respite came and I beheld again the seven little dogs 
carrying out their evolutions, making their leaps; I 
longed to shout to them in spite of their aloofness, to 
beg them to enlighten me, to ask them what they were 
doing — I was a child and believed I could ask anybody 
about anything — but hardly had I begun, hardly did I 
feel on good and familiar doggish terms with the seven, 
when the music started again, robbed me of my wits, 
whirled me round in its circles as if I myself were one 
of the musicians instead of being only their victim, cast 
me hither and thither, no matter how much I begged 
for mercy, and rescued me finally from its own violence 
by driving me into a labyrinth of wooden bars which 
rose round that place, though I had not noticed it before, 
but which now firmly caught me, kept my head pressed 
to the ground, and though the music still resounded in 
the open space behind me, gave me a little time to get 
my breath back. I must admit that I was less surprised 
by the artistry of the seven dogs — it was incomprehensi- 
ble to me, and also quite definitely beyond my capacities 
— ^than by their courage in facing so openly the music of 
their own making, and their power to endure it calmly 
without collapsing. But now from my hiding hole I 
saw, on looking more closely, that it was not so much 
coolness as the most extreme tension that characterized 



INVESTIGATIONS OF A DOG 200 

their performance; these limbs apparently so sure in 
their movements quivered at every step with a perpetual 
apprehensive twitching; as if rigid with despair the 
dogs kept their eyes fixed on one another, and their 
tongues, whenever the tension weakened for a moment,, 
hung wearily from their jowls. It could not be fear of 
failure that agitated them so deeply; dogs that could 
dare and achieve such things had no need to fear that. 
Then why were they afraid? Who then forced them to 
do what they were doing? And I could no longer re- 
strain myself, particularly as they now seemed in some 
incomprehensible way in need of help, and so through 
all the din of the music I shouted out my questions 
loudly and challengingly. But they — incredible! in- 
credible! — they never replied, behaved as if I were not 
there. Dogs who make no reply to the greeting of other 
dogs are guilty of an offence against good manners 
which the humblest dog would never pardon any more 
than the greatest. Perhaps they were not dogs at all? 
But how should they not be dogs? Could I not actually 
hear on listening more closely the subdued cries with 
which they encouraged each other, drew each other’s 
attention to difficulties, warned each other against er- 
rors; could I not see the last and youngest dog, to whom 
most of those cries were addressed, often stealing a 
glance at me as if he would have dearly wished to 
reply, but refrained because it was not allowed? But 
why should it not be allowed, why should the very thing 
which our laws unconditionally command not be al- 
lowed in this one case? I became indignant at the 
thought and almost forgot the music. Those dogs were 



210 INVESTIGATIONS OF A DOG 

violating the law. Great magicians they might be, but 
the law was valid for them too, I knew that quite well 
though I was a child. And having recognized that I now 
noticed something else. ,They had good grounds for re- 
maining silent, that is, assuming that they remained 
silent from a sense of shame. For how were they conduct- 
ing themselves? Because of all the music I had not no- 
ticed it before, but they had flung away all shame, the 
wretched creatures were doing the very thing which is 
both most ridiculous and indecent in our eyes; they 
were walking on their hind legs. Fie on them! They 
were uncovering their nakedness, blatantly making a 
show of their nakedness: they were doing that as though 
it were a meritorious act, and when, obeying their better 
instincts for a moment, they happened to let their front 
paws fall, they were literally appalled as if at an error, 
as if Nature were an error, hastily raised their legs again, 
and their eyes seemed to be begging for forgiveness for 
having been forced to cease momentarily from their 
abomination. Was the world standing on its head? 
Where could I be? What could have happened? If only 
for my own sake I dared not hesitate any longer now, I 
dislodged myself from the tangle of bars, took one leap 
into the open and made towards the dogs — I, the younger 
scholar, must be the teacher now, must make them un- 
derstand what they were doing, must keep them from 
committing further sin. “And old dogs tool And old 
dogs too!” I kept on saying to myself. But scarcely was 
I free and only a leap or two away from the dogs, when 
the music again had me in its power. Perhaps in my 
ardor I might even have managed to withstand it, for 



INVESTIGATIONS OF A DOG 

I knew it better now, if in the midst of all its majestic 
amplitude, which was terrifying, but still not incom 
querable, a clear, piercing, continuous note which came 
without variation literally from the remotest distance 
— perhaps the real melody in the midst of the music — 
had not now rung out, forcing me to my knees. Oh, the 
music these dogs made almost drove me out of my 
senses! I could not move a step farther, I no longer 
wanted to instruct them; they could go on raising their 
front legs, committing sin and seducing others to the sin 
of silently regarding them; I was such a young dog — 
who could demand such a difficult task from me? I made 
myself still more insignificant than I was, I whimpered, 
and if the dogs had asked me now what I thought of 
their performance, probably I would have had not a 
word to say against it. Besides it was not long before 
the dogs vanished with all their music and their radi- 
ance into the darkness from which they had emerged. 

As I have already said, this whole episode contains 
nothing of much note; in the course of a long life one 
encounters all sorts of things which, taken from their 
context and seen through the eyes of a child, might well 
seem far more astonishing. Besides, one may, of course 
— in the pungent popular phrase — have “got it all 
wrong,*' as well as everything connected with it; then it 
could be demonstrated that this was simply a case where 
seven musicians had assembled to practise their art in 
the morning stillness, that a very young dog had strayed 
to the place, a burdensome intruder whom they had 
tried to drive away by particularly terrifying or lofty 
music, unfortunately with success. He pestered them 



aiS INVESTIGATIONS OF A DOG 

with his questions: were they, already disturbed enough 
by the mere presence of the stranger, to be expected to 
attend to his distracting interruptions as well and make 
them worse by responding to them? Even if the law com- 
mands us to reply to everybody, was such a tiny stray 
dog in truth a somebody worthy of the name? And per- 
haps they did not even understand him, for he likely 
enough barked his questions very indistinctly. Or per- 
haps they did understand him and with great self-control 
answered his questions, but he, a mere puppy unac- 
customed to music, could not distinguish the answer 
from the music. And as for walking on their hind legs, 
perhaps, unlike other dogs, they actually used only 
these for walking; if it was a sin, well it was a sin. But 
they were alone, seven friends together, an intimate 
gathering within their own four walls so to speak, 
quite private so to speak; for one’s friends, after all, are 
not the public, and where the public is not present an 
inquisitive little street dog is certainly not capable of 
constituting it; but, granting this, is it not as if nothing 
at all had happened? It’s not quite so, but very nearly 
so, and parents should not let their children run about 
so freely, and had much better teach them to hold their 
tongues and respect the aged. 

If all this is admitted, then it disposes of the whole 
case. But many things that are disposed of in the minds 
of grown-ups are not yet settled in the minds of the 
young. I rushed about, told my story, asked questions, 
made accusations and investigations, tried to drag others 
to the place where all this had happened, and burned 
to show everybody where I had stood and where the 



INVESTIGATIONS OF A DOG 21 $ 

seven had stood, and where and how they had danced 
and made their music; and if any one had come with 
me, instead of shaking me off and laughing at me, I 
would probably have sacrificed my innocence and tried 
myself to stand on my hind legs so as to reconstruct the 
scene clearly. Now children are blamed for all they do, 
but also in the last resort forgiven for all they do. And I 
have preserved my childish qualities, and in spite of that 
have grown to be an old dog. Well, just as at that time 
I kept on unceasingly discussing the foregoing incident 
— which today I must confess I lay far less importance 
upon — analyzing it into its constituent parts, arguing it 
with my listeners without regard to the company I found 
myself in, devoting my whole time to the problem, 
which I found as wearisome as everybody else, but 
which — that was the difference — for that very reason I 
was resolved to pursue indefatigably until I solved it, 
so that I might be left free again to regard the ordinary, 
calm, happy life of every day: just so have I, though 
with less childish means — ^yet the difference is not so 
very great — labored in the years since and go on la^ 
boring today. 

But it began with that concert. I do not blame the 
concert; it is my innate disposition that has driven me 
on, and it would certainly have found some other op* 
portunity of coming into action had the concert nevei 
taken place. Yet the fact that it happened so soon used 
to make me feel sorry for myself; it robbed me of a great 
part of my childhood; the blissful life of the young dog, 
which many can spin out for years, in my case lasted for 
only a few short months. So be it. There are more im- 



214 INVESTIGATIONS OF A DOG 

portant things than childhood. And perhaps I have the 
prospect o£ far more childish happiness, earned by a 
life of hard work, in my old age than any actual child 
would have the strength to bear, but which then I shall 
possess. 

I began my enquiries with the simplest things; there 
was no lack of material; it is the actual superabundance, 
unfortunately, that casts me into despair in my darker 
hours. I began to enquire into the question: What the 
canine race nourished itself upon. Now that is, if you 
like, by no means a simple question, of course; it has 
occupied us since the dawn of time, it is the chief object 
of all our medication, countless observations and essays 
and views on this subject have been published, it has 
grown into a province of knowledge which in its pro- 
digious compass is not only beyond the comprehension 
of any single scholar, but of all our scholars collectively, 
a burden which cannot be borne except by the whole 
of the dog community, and even then with difficulty 
and not quite in its totality; for it ever and again crum- 
bles away like a neglected ancestral inheritance and 
must laboriously be rehabilitated anew — ^not to speak 
at all of the difficulties and almost unfulfillable condi- 
tions of my investigation. No one need point all this 
out to me, I know it all as well as any average sensual 
dog can do; I have no ambition to meddle with real 
scientific matters, I have all -the respect for knowledge 
that it deserves, but to increase knowledge I lack the 
equipment, the diligence, the leisure, and — ^not least, 
and particularly during the past few years — the desire 
as well. I swallow down my food, but the slightest pre- 



INVESTIGATIONS OF A DOG 215 

liminary methodical politico-economical observation of 
it does not seem to me worth while. In this connection 
the essence of all knowledge is enough for me, the simple 
rule with which the mother weans her young ones from 
her teats and sends them out into the world: "Water the 
ground as much as you can.” And in this sentence is not 
almost everything contained? What has scientific en- 
quiry, ever since our first fathers inaugurated it, of 
decisive importance to add to this? Mere details, mere 
details, and how uncertain they are: but this rule will 
remain as long as we are dogs. It concerns our main 
staple of food: true, we have also other resources, but 
only at a pinch, and if the year is not too bad we could 
live on this main staple of our food; this food we find 
on the earth, but the earth needs our water to nourish 
it and only at that price provides us with our food, the 
emergence of which, however, and this should not be 
forgotten, can also be hastened by certain spells, songs, 
and ritual movements. But in my opinion that is all; 
there is nothing else that is fundamental to be said on 
the question. In this opinion, moreover, I am at one 
with the vast majority of the dog community, and must 
firmly dissociate myself from all heretical views on this 
point. Quite honestly I have no ambition to be peculiarv 
or to pose as being in the right against the majority; 
I am only too happy when I can agree with my com- 
rades, as I do in this case. My own enquiries, however, 
are in another direction. My personal observation tells 
me that the earth, when it is watered and scratched ac- 
cording to the rules of science, extrudes nourishment, 
and moreover in such quality, in such abundance, in 



2i6 investigations of a dog 

such ways, in such places, at such hours, as the laws par- 
tially or completely established by science demand. I 
accept all this; my question, however, is the following: 
'‘Whence does the earth procure this food?’' A question 
which people in general pretend not to understand, and 
to which the best answer they can give is: “If you haven’t 
enough to eat, we’ll give you some of ours.” Now con- 
sider this answer. I know that it is not one of the virtues 
of dogdom to share with others food that one has once 
gained possession of. Life is hard, the earth stubborn, 
science rich in knowledge but poor in practical results: 
any one who has food keeps it to himself; that is not 
selfishness, but the opposite, dog law, the unanimous 
decision of the people, the outcome of their victory over 
egoism, for the possessors are always in a minority. And 
for that reason this answer: “If you haven’t enough to 
eat, we’ll give you some of ours” is merely a way of speak- 
ing, a jest, a form of raillery. I have not forgotten that. 
But all the more significant did it seem to me, when I 
was rushing about everywhere with my questions dur- 
ing those days, that they put the jest aside as far as I was 
concerned; true, they did not actually give me anything 
to eat — ^where could they have found it at a moment’s 
notice? — and even if any one chanced to have some food, 
naturally he forgot everything else in the fury of his 
hunger; yet they all seriously meant what they said when 
they made the offer, and here and there, right enough, 
I was presently allowed some slight trifle if I was only 
smart enough to snatch it quickly. How came it that peo- 
ple treated me so strangely, pampered me, favored 
me? Because I was a lean dog, badly fed and neglectful 



INVESTIGATIONS OF A DOG 21 ^ 

of my needs? But there were countless badly fed dogs 
running about, and the others snatched even the wretch- 
edest scrap from under their noses whenever they could, 
and not often from greed, but generally on principle. 
No, they treated me with special favor; I cannot give 
much detailed proof of this, but I have a firm conviction 
that it was so. Was it my questions, then, that pleased 
them, and that they regarded as so clever? No, my ques- 
tions did not please them and were generally looked on 
as stupid. And yet it could only have been my questions 
that won me their attention. It was as if they would 
rather do the impossible, that is stop my mouth with 
food — they did not do it, but they would have liked to do 
it — than endure my questions. But in that case they 
would have done better to drive me away and refuse to 
listen to my questions. No, they did not want to do that; 
they did not indeed want to listen to my questions, but 
it was because I asked questions that they did not want 
to drive me away. That was the time — ^much as I was 
ridiculed and treated as a silly puppy, and pushed here 
and pushed there — the time when I actually enjoyed 
most public esteem; never again was I to enjoy anything 
like it; I had free entry everywhere, no obstacle was put 
in my way, I was actually flattered, though the flattery 
was disguised as rudeness. And all really because of my 
questions, my impatience, my thirst for knowledge. Did 
they want to lull me to sleep, to divert me, without vio- 
lence, almost lovingly, from a false path, yet a path 
whose falseness was not so completely beyond all doubt 
that violence was permissible? — Also a certain respect 
and fear kept them from employing violence. I divined 



Sl8 INVESTIGATIONS OF A DOG 

even in those days something of this; today I know it 
quite well, far better than those who actually practised 
it at the time: what they wanted to do was really to di- 
vert me from my path* They did not succeed; they 
achieved the opposite; my vigilance was sharpened. 
More, it became clear to me that it was I who was try- 
ing to seduce the others, and that I was actually success- 
ful up to a certain point. Only with the assistance of the 
whole dog world could I begin to understand my own 
questions. For instance when I asked: “Whence does 
the earth procure this food?’' was I troubled, as appear- 
ances might quite well indicate, about the earth; was I 
troubled about the labors of the earth? Not in the least; 
that, as I very soon recognized, was far from my mind; 
all that I cared for was the race of dogs, that and noth- 
ing else. For what is there actually except our own 
species? To whom but it can one appeal in the wide and 
empty world? All knowledge, the totality of all ques- 
tions and all answers, is contained in the dog. If one 
could but* realize this knowledge, if one could but bring 
it into the light of day, if we dogs would but own that 
We know infinitely more than we admit to ourselves! 
Even the most loquacious dog is more secretive of his 
knowledge than the places where good food can be 
found. Trembling with desire, whipping yourself with 
your own tail, you steal cautiously upon your fellow-dog, 
you ask, you beg, you howl, you bite, and achieve — and 
achieve what you could have achieved just as well with- 
out any effort; amiable attention, friendly contiguity, 
honest acceptance, ardent embraces, barks that mingle 
as one: everything is directed towards achieving an 



INVESTIGATIONS OF A DOG 219 

ecstasy, a forgetting and finding again; but the one thing 
that you long to win above all, the admission of know- 
ledge, remains denied to you. To such prayers, whether 
silent or loud, the only answer you get, even after 
you have employed your powers of seduction to the ut- 
most, are vacant stares, averted glances, troubled and 
veiled eyes. It is much the same as it was when, a mere 
puppy, I shouted to the dog musicians and they re- 
mained silent. 

Now one might say: '‘You torment yourself because 
of your fellow-dogs, because of their silence on crucial 
questions; you assert that they know more than they 
admit, more than they will allow to be valid, and that 
this silence, the mysterious reason for which is also, of 
course, tacitly concealed, poisons existence and makes it 
unendurable for you, so that you must either alter it or 
have done with it; that may be; but you are yourself a 
dog, you have also the dog knowledge; well, bring it 
out, not merely in the form of a question, but as an an- 
swer. If you utter it, who will think of opposing you? 
The great choir of dogdom will join in as if it had been 
waiting for you. Then you will have clarity, truth, 
avowal, as much of them as you desire. The roof of this 
wretched life, of which you say so many hard things, will 
burst open, and all of us, shoulder to shoulder, will as- 
cend into the lofty realm of freedom. And if we should 
not achieve that final consummation, if things should 
become worse than before, if the whole truth should be 
more insupportable than the half, if it should be proved 
that the silent are in the right as the guardians of exist- 
ence, if the faint hope that we still possess should give 



220 INVESTIGATIONS OF A DOG 

way to complete hopelessness, the attempt is still worth 
the trial, since you do not desire to live as you are com- 
pelled to live. Well, then, why do you make it a reproach 
against the others that they are silent, and remain silent 
yourself?” Easy to answer: Because I am a dog; in es- 
sentials just as locked in silence as the others, stubbornly 
resisting my own questions, dour out of fear. To be 
precise, is it in the hope that they might answer me that 
I have questioned my fellow-dogs, at least since my adult 
years? Have I any such foolish hope? Can I contemplate 
the foundations of our existence, divine their profun- 
dity, rvatch the labor of their construction, that dark 
labor, and expect all this to be forsaken, neglected, 
undone, simply because I ask a question? No, that I truly 
expect no longer. I understand my fellow-dogs, am flesh 
of their flesh, of their miserable, ever-renewed, ever- 
desirous flesh. But it is not merely flesh and blood that 
we have in common, but knowledge also, and not only 
knowledge, but the key to it as well. I do not possess that 
key except in common with all the others; I cannot grasp 
it without their help. The hardest bones, containing the 
richest marrow, can be conquered only by a united 
crunching of all the teeth of all dogs. That of course is 
only a figure of speech and exaggerated; if all teeth were 
but ready they would not need even to bite, the bones 
would crack themselves and the marrow would be freely 
accessible to the feeblest of dogs. If I remain faithful 
to this metaphor, then the goal of my aims, my ques- 
tions, my enquiries, appears monstrous, it is true. For I 
want to compel all dogs thus to assemble together, I 
want the bones to crack open under the pressure of their 



INVESTIGATIONS OF A DOG 221 

collective preparedness, and then I want to dismiss them 
to the ordinary life that they love, while all by myself, 
quite alone, I lap up the marrow. That sounds monstrous, 
almost as if I wanted to feed on the marrow, not merely 
of a bone, but of the whole canine race itself. But it is 
only a metaphor. The marrow that I am discussing here 
is no food; on the contrary it is a poison. 

My questions only serve as a goad to myself; I only 
want to be stimulated by the silence which rises up 
around me as the ultimate answer. “How long will you 
be able to endure the fact that the world of dogs, as your 
researches make more and more evident, is pledged to 
silence and always will be? How long will you be able to 
endure it?” That is the real great question of my life, 
before which all smaller ones sink into insignificance; it 
is put to myself alone and concerns no one else. Un- 
fortunately I can answer it more easily than the smaller, 
specific questions: I shall probably hold out till my nat- 
ural end; the calm of old age will put up a greater and 
greater resistance to all disturbing questions. I shall very 
likely die in silence and surrounded by silence, indeed 
almost peacefully, and I look forward to that with com- 
posure. An admirably strong heart, lungs that it is im- 
possible to use up before their time, have been given to 
us dogs as if in malice; we survive all questions, even 
our o^vn, bulwarks of silence that we are. 

Recently I have taken more and more to casting up my 
life, looking for the decisive, the fundamental, error thaf 
I must surely have made; and I cannot find it. And yet 1 
must have made it, for if I had not made it and yet 
were unable by the diligent labor of a long life to 



S?22 INVESTIGATIONS OF A DOG 

achieve my desire, that would prove that my desire is 
impossible, and complete hopelessness must follow. 
Behold, then, the work of a lifetime. First of all my 
enquiries into the question: Whence does the earth 
procure the food it gives us? A young dog, at bottom 
naturally greedy for life, I renounced all enjoyments, 
apprehensively avoided all pleasures, buried my head 
between my front paws when I was confronted by temp- 
tation, and addressed myself to my task. I was no scholar, 
neither in the information I acquired, nor in method, 
nor in intention. That was probably a defect, but it could 
not have been a decisive one. I had had little schooling, 
for I left my mother’s care at an early age, soon got used 
to independence, led a free life; and premature inde- 
pendence is inimical to systematic learning. But I have 
seen much, listened to much, spoken with dogs of all 
sorts and conditions, understood everything, I believe, 
fairly intelligently, and correlated my particular ob- 
servations fairly intelligently: that has compensated 
somewhat for my lack of scholarship, not to mention that 
independence, if it is a disadvantage in learning things, 
is an actual advantage when one is making one’s own 
enquiries. In my case it was all the more necessary as 
I was not able to employ the real method of science, to 
avail myself, that is, of the labors of my predecessors, 
and establish contact with contemporary investigators. 
I was entirely cast on my own resources, began at the 
very beginning, and with the consciousness, inspiriting 
to youth, but utterly crushing to age, that the fortui- 
tous point to which I carried my labors must also be 
the final one. Was I really so alone in my enquiries, at 



INVESTIGATIONS OF A DOG 22^ 

the beginning and up to now? Yes and no. It is incon 
ceivable that there must not always have been and that 
there are not today individual dogs in the same case as 
myself. I cannot be so accursed as that. I do not devh 
ate from the dog nature by a hairbreadth. Every dog 
has like me the impulse to question, and 1 have like 
every dog the impulse not to answer. Every one has the 
impulse to question. How otherwise could my questions 
have affected my hearers in the slightest — and they were 
often affected, to my ecstatic delight, an exaggerated 
delight, I must confess — and how otherwise could I have 
been prevented from achieving much more than I have 
done? And that I have the compulsion to remain silent 
needs unfortunately no particular proof. I am at bottom, 
then, no different from any other dog; everybody, no 
matter how he may differ in opinion from me and reject 
my views, will gladly admit that, and I in turn will admit 
as much of any other dog. Only the mixture of the ele- 
ments is different, a difference very important for the 
individual, insignificant for the race. And now can one 
credit that the composition of these available elements 
has never chanced through all the past and present to 
result in a mixture similar to mine, one, moreover, if 
mine be regarded as unfortunate, more unfortunate 
still? To think so would be contrary to all experience. 
We dogs are all engaged in the strangest occupations, 
occupations in which one would refuse to believe if one 
had not the most reliable information concerning them. 
The best example that I can quote is that of the soaring 
dog. The first time I heard of one I laughed and simply 
refused to believe it. What? One was asked to believe 



224 INVESTIGATIONS uF A DOG 

that there was a very tiny species of dog, not much big- 
ger than my head even when it was full grown, and this 
dog, who must of course be a feeble creature, an artifi- 
cial, weedy, brushed and curled fop by all accounts, in- 
capable of making an honest jump, this dog was sup- 
posed, according to people’s stories, to remain for the 
most part high up in the air, apparently doing nothing 
at all but simply resting there? No, to try to make me 
swallow such things was exploiting the simplicity of a 
young dog too outrageously, I told myself. But shortly 
afterwards I heard from another source an account of 
another soaring dog. Could there be a conspiracy to 
fool me? But after that I saw the dog musicians with my 
own eyes, and from that day I considered everything 
possible, no prejudices fettered my powers of apprehen- 
sion, I investigated the most senseless rumors, follow- 
ing them as far as they could take me, and the most sense- 
less seemed to me in this senseless world more probable 
than the sensible, and moreover particularly fertile for 
investigation. So it was too with the soaring dogs. I dis- 
covered a great many things about them; true, I have 
succeeded to this day in seeing none of them, but of their 
existence I have been firmly convinced for a long time, 
and they occupy an important place in my picture of the 
world. As usual it is not, of course, their technique that 
chiefly gives me to think. It is wonderful — ^who can gain- 
say it? — that these dogs should be able to float in the air: 
in my amazed admiration for that I am at one with my 
fellow-dogs. But far more strange to my mind is the 
senselessness, the dumb senselessness of these existences. 
They have no relation whatever to the general life of 



INVESTIGATIONS OF A DOG 325 

the community, they hover in the air, and that is all, 
and life goes on its usual way; someone now and then 
refers to art and artists, but there it ends. But why, my 
good dogs, why on earth do these dogs float in the air? 
What sense is there in their occupation? Why can one 
get no word of explanation regarding them? Why do they 
hover up there, letting their legs, the pride of dogs, fall 
into desuetude, preserving a detachment from the nour- 
ishing earth, reaping without having sowed, being par- 
ticularly well provided for, as I hear, and at the cost 
of the dog community too? I can flatter myself that my 
enquiries into these matters made some stir. People 
began to investigate after a fashion, to collect data; they 
made a beginning, at least, although they are never likely 
to go farther. But after all that is something. And 
though the truth will not be discovered by such means 
— never can that stage be reached — ^yet they throw light 
on some of the profounder ramifications of falsehood. 
For all the senseless phenomena of our existence, and 
the most senseless by far of all, are susceptible of in- 
vestigation. Not completely, of course — that is the dia- 
bolical jest — but sufficiently to spare one painful ques- 
tions. Take the soaring dogs once more as an example; 
they are not haughty as one might imagine at first, but 
rather particularly dependent upon their fellow-dog; 
if one tries to put oneself in their place one will see that. 
For they must do what they can to obtain pardon, and 
not openly — that would be a violation of the obligation 
to keep silence — they must do what they can to obtain 
pardon for their way of life, or else divert attention 
from it so that it may be forgotten — ^and they do this, I 



SSG INVESTIGATIONS OF A DOG 

have been told, by means of an almost unendurable 
volubility. They are perpetually talking, partly of their 
philosophical reflections, with which, seeing that they 
have completely renounced bodily exertion, they can 
continuously occupy themselves, partly of the observa- 
tions which they have made from their exalted stations; 
and although, as is very understandable considering 
their lazy existence, they are not much distinguished 
for intellectual power, and their philosophy is as worth- 
less as their observations, and science can make hardly 
any use of their utterances, and besides is not reduced 
to draw assistance from such wretched sources, never- 
theless if one asks what the soaring dogs are really doing 
one will invariably receive the reply that they contrib- 
ute a great deal to knowledge. ‘‘That is true,’' remarks 
someone, “but their contributions are worthless and 
wearisome.” The reply to that is a shrug, or a change 
of the subject, or annoyance, or laughter, and in a little 
while, when you ask again, you learn once more that 
they contribute to knowledge, and finally when you are 
asked the question you yourself will reply — if you are 
not careful — to the same effect. And perhaps indeed it 
is well not to be too obstinate, but to yield to public 
sentiment, to accept the extant soaring dogs, and with- 
out recognizing their right to existence, which cannot 
be done, yet to tolerate them. But more than this must 
not be required; that would be going too far, and yet 
the demand is made. We are perpetually being asked 
to put up with new soaring dogs who are always appear- 
ing. One does not even know where they come from. 
Do these dogs multiply by propagation? Have they ac- 



INVESTIGATIONS OF A DOG 2^7 

tually the strength for that? — for they are nothing much 
more than a beautiful coat of hair, and what is there in 
that to propagate? But even if that improbable contin- 
gency were possible, when could it take place? For they 
are invariably seen alone, self-complacently floating 
high up in the air, and if for once in a while they descend 
to take a run, it lasts only for a minute or two, a few 
mincing struts and once more they are back in strict solh 
tude, absorbed in what is supposed to be profound 
thought, from which, even when they exert themselves 
to the utmost, they cannot tear themselves free, or at 
least so they say. But if they do not propagate their 
kind, is it credible that there can be dogs who volun- 
tarily give up life on the solid ground, voluntarily be- 
come soaring dogs, and merely for the sake of the com- 
fort and a certain technical accomplishment choose 
that empty life on cushions up there? It is unthinkable; 
neither propagation nor voluntary transition is think- 
able. The facts, however, show that there are always 
new soaring dogs in evidence; from which one must 
conclude that, in spite of obstacles which appear in- 
surmountable to our understanding, no dog species, 
however curious, ever dies out, once it exists, or, at least, 
not without a tough struggle, not without being capable 
of putting up a successful defense for a long time. 

But if that is valid for such an out-of-the-way, ex- 
ternally odd, inefficient species as the soaring dog, must 
I not also accept it as valid for mine? Besides, I am not 
in the least queer outwardly; an ordinary middle-class 
dog such as is very prevalent, in this neighborhood, 
at least, I am neither particularly exceptional in any 



528 INVESTIGATIONS OF A DOG 

way, nor particularly repellent in any way; and in my 
youth and to some extent also in maturity, so long as I 
attended to my appearance and had lots of exercise, I 
was actually considered a very handsome dog. My front 
view was particularly admired, my slim legs, the fine 
set of my head; but my silvery white and yellow coat, 
which curled only at the hair tips, was very pleasing 
too; in all that there was nothing strange; the only 
strange thing about me is my nature, yet even that, as 
I am always careful to remember, has its foundation in 
universal dog nature. Now if not even the soaring dogs 
live in isolation, but invariably manage to encounter 
their fellows somewhere or other in the great dog world, 
and even to conjure new generations of themselves out 
of nothingness, then I too can live in the confidence 
that I am not quite forlorn. Certainly the fate of types 
like mine must be a strange one, and the existence of 
my colleagues can never be of visible help to me, if for 
no other reason than that I should scarcely ever be 
able to recognize them. We are the dogs who are crushed 
by the silence, who long to break through it, literally 
to get a breath of fresh air; the others seem to thrive on 
silence: true, that is only so in appearance, as in the case 
of the musical dogs, who ostensibly were quite calm 
when they played, but in reality were in a state of in- 
tense excitement; nevertheless the illusion is very 
strong, one tries to make a breach in it, but it mocks 
every attempt. What help, then, do my colleagues find? 
What kind of attempts do they make to manage to go 
on living in spite of everything? These attempts may 
be of various kinds. My own bout of questioning while 



INVESTIGATIONS OF A DOG 22^ 

I was young was one. So I thought that perhaps i£ I as^ 
sociated with those who asked many questions I might 
find my real comrades. Well, I did so for some time, 
with great self-control, a self-control made necessary 
by the annoyance I felt when I was interrupted by pen 
petual questions that I mostly could not answer myself: 
for the only thing that concerns me is to obtain answers. 
Moreover, who but is eager to ask questions when he is 
young, and how, when so many questions are going 
about, are you to pick out the right questions? One ques- 
tion sounds like another; it is the intention that counts, 
but that is often hidden even from the questioner. And 
besides it is a peculiarity of dogs to be always asking 
questions, they ask them confusedly all together; it is 
as if in doing that they were trying to obliterate every 
trace of the genuine questions. No, my real colleagues 
are not to be found among the youthful questioners, 
and just as little among the old and silent, to whom I 
now belong. But what good are all these questions, for 
they have failed me completely; apparently my col- 
leagues are cleverer dogs than I, and have recourse to 
other excellent methods that enable them to bear this 
life, methods which, nevertheless, as I can tell from my 
own experience, though they may perhaps help at a 
pinch, though they may calm, lull to rest, distract, are 
yet on the whole as impotent as my own, for, no matter 
where I look, I can see no sign of their success. I am 
afraid that the last thing by which I can hope to recog- 
nize my real colleagues is their success. But where, then, 
are my real colleagues? Yes, that is the burden of my 
complaint; that is the kernel of it. Where are they? 



230 INVESTIGATIONS OF A DOG 

Everywhere and nowhere. Perhaps my next-door neigh- 
bor, only three jumps away, is one of them; we often 
bark across to each other, he calls on me sometimes too, 
though I do not call on him. Is he my real colleague? I 
do not know, I certainly see no sign of it in him, but it 
is possible. It is possible, but all the same nothing is 
more improbable. When he is away I can amuse myself, 
drawing on my fancy, by discovering in him many things 
that have a suspicious resemblance to myself; but once 
he stands before me all my fancies become ridiculous. 
An old dog, a little smaller even than myself — and I am 
hardly medium size — ^brown, short-haired, wdth a tired 
hang of the head and a shuffling gait; on the top of all 
this he trails his left hind leg behind him a little be- 
cause of some disease. For a long time now I have been 
more intimate with him than with anybody else; I am 
glad to say that I can still get on tolerably well with 
him, and when he goes away I shout the most friendly 
greetings after him, though not out of affection, but in 
anger at myself; for if I follow him I find him just as 
disgusting again, slinking along there with his trailing 
leg and his much too low hind-quarters. Sometimes it 
seems to me as if I were trying to humiliate myself by 
privately calling him my colleague. Nor in our talks does 
he betray any trace of similarity of thought; true, he is 
clever and cultured enough as these things go here, and 
I could learn much from him; but is it for cleverness 
and culture that I am looking? We converse usually 
about local questions, and I am astonished — my isolation 
has made me more clear-sighted in such matters — how 
much intelligence is needed even by an ordinary dog, 



INVESTIGATIONS OF A DOG 

even in average and not unfavorable circumstances, if 
he is to live out his life and defend himself against the 
greater of life’s customary dangers. True, knowledge 
provides the rules one must follow, but even to grasp 
them imperfectly and in rough outline is by no means 
easy, and when one has actually grasped them the real 
difficulty still remains, namely, to apply them to local 
conditions — here almost nobody can help, almost every 
hour brings new tasks, and every new patch of earth its 
specific problems; no one can maintain that he has set- 
tled everything for good and that henceforth his life 
will go on, so to speak, of itself, not even I my- 
self, though my needs shrink literally from day to day. 
And all this ceaseless labor — ^to what end? Merely to 
entomb oneself deeper and deeper in silence, it seems, 
so deep that one can never be dragged out of it again 
by anybody. 

People often cry up the universal progress made by 
the dog community throughout the ages, and probably 
mean by that more particularly the progress in knowl- 
edge. Certainly knowledge is progressing, its advance 
is irresistible, it actually progresses at an accelerating 
speed, always faster, but what is there to praise in that? 
It is as if one were to praise someone because with the 
years he grows older, and in consequence comes nearer 
and nearer to death with increasing speed. That is a 
natural and moreover an ugly process, in which I find 
nothing to praise. I can only see decline everywhere, 
in saying which, however, I do not mean that earlier 
generations were essentially better than ours, but only 
younger; that was their great advantage, their memory 



232 INVESTIGATIONS OF A DOG 

was not so overburdened as ours today, it was easier to 
get them to speak out, and even if nobody actually suc- 
ceeded in doing that, the possibility of it was greater, 
and it is indeed this greater sense of possibility that 
moves us so deeply when we listen to those old and 
strangely simple stories. Here and there we catch a 
curiously significant phrase and we would almost like 
to leap to our feet, if we did not feel the weight of cen- 
turies upon us. No, whatever objection I may have to 
my age, former generations were not better, indeed 
in a sense they were far worse, far weaker. Even in those 
days wonders did not openly walk the streets for any 
one to seize; but all the same dogs — I cannot put it in 
any other way — had not yet become so doggish as today, 
the edifice of dogdom was still loosely put together, the 
true Word could still have intervened, planning or re- 
planning the structure, changing it at will, transforming 
it into its opposite; and the Word was there, was very 
near at least, on the tip of everybody’s tongue, any 
one might have hit upon it. And what has become of 
it today? Today one may pluck out one’s very heart 
and not find it. Our generation is lost, it may be, but it 
is more blameless than those earlier ones. I can under- 
stand the hesitation of my generation, indeed it is no 
longer mere hesitation; it is the thousandth forgetting 
of a dream dreamt a thousand times and forgotten a 
thousand times; and who can damn us merely for for- 
getting for the thousandth time? But I fancy I under- 
stand the hesitation of our forefathers too, we would 
probably have acted just as they did; indeed I could 
almost say: Well for us that it was not we who had to 



INVESTIGATIONS OF A DOG 233 

take the guilt upon us, that instead we can hasten in 
almost guiltless silence towards death in a world dark, 
ened by others. When our first fathers strayed they had 
doubtless scarcely any notion that their aberration was 
to be an endless one, they could still literally see the 
cross-roads, it seemed an easy matter to turn back whem 
ever they pleased, and if they hesitated to turn back it 
was merely because they wanted to enjoy a dog’s life 
for a little while longer; it was not yet a genuine dog’s 
life, and already it seemed intoxicatingly beautiful to 
them, so what must it become in a little while, a very 
little while, and so they strayed farther. They did not 
know what we can now guess at, contemplating the 
course of history: that change begins in the soul before 
it appears in ordinary existence, and that, when they 
began to enjoy a dog’s life, they must already have pos- 
sessed real old dogs’ souls, and were by no means so 
near their starting-point as they thought, or as their 
eyes feasting on all doggish joys tried to persuade them. 
But who can speak of youth at this time of day? These 
were the really young dogs, but their sole ambition un- 
fortunately was to become old dogs, truly a thing which 
they could not fail to achieve, as all succeeding genera- 
tions show, and ours, the last, most clearly of all. 

Naturally I do not talk to my neighbor of these 
things, but often I cannot but think of them when I am 
sitting opposite him — that typical old dog — or bury my 
nose in his coat, which already has a whiff of the smell 
of cast-off hides. To talk to him, or even to any of the 
others, about such things, would be pointless. I know 
what course the conversation would take. He would 



234 INVESTIGATIONS OF A DOG 

urge a slight objection now and then, but finally he 
would agree — agreement is the best weapon of defense 
' — and the matter would be buried; why indeed trouble 
to exhume it at all? And in spite of this there is a pro- 
founder understanding between my neighbor and me, 
going deeper than mere words. I shall never cease to 
maintain that, though I have no proof of it and perhaps 
am merely suffering from an ordinary delusion, caused 
by the fact that for a long time this dog has been the 
only one with whom I have held any communication, 
and so I am bound to cling to him. “Are you after all 
my colleague in your own fashion? And ashamed be- 
cause everything has miscarried with you? Look, the 
same fate has been mine. When I am alone I weep over 
it; come, it is sweeter to weep in company.’' I often have 
such thoughts as these and then I give him a prolonged 
look. He does not lower his glance, but neither can one 
read anything from it; he gazes at me dully, wondering 
why I am silent and why I have broken off the conversa- 
tion. But perhaps that very glance is his way of ques- 
tioning me, and I disappoint him just as he disappoints 
me. In my youth, if other problems had not been more 
important to me then, and I had not been perfectly 
satisfied with my own company, I would probably have 
asked him straight out and received an answer flatly 
agreeing with me, and that would have been worse 
even than today’s silence. But is not everybody silent 
exactly in the same way? What is there to prevent me 
from believing that everyone is my colleague, instead 
of thinking that I have only one or two fellow-enquirers 
-—lost and forgotten along with their petty achievements.- 



INVESTIGATIONS OF A DOG 335 

SO that I can never reach them by any road through the 
darkness of ages or the confused throng of the present: 
why not believe that all dogs from the beginning of 
time have been my colleagues, all diligent in their own 
way, all unsuccessful in their own way, all silent or 
falsely garrulous in their own way, as hopeless research 
is apt to make one? But in that case I need not have 
severed myself from my fellows at all, I could have re- 
mained quietly among the others, I had no need to fight 
my way out like a stubborn child through the closed 
ranks of the grown-ups, who indeed wanted as much as 
I to find a way out, and who seemed incomprehensible 
to me simply because of their knowledge, which told 
them that nobody could ever escape and that it was 
stupid to use force. 

Such ideas, however, are definitely due to the influ- 
ence of my neighbor; he confuses me, he fills me with 
dejection; and yet in himself he is happy enough, at 
least when he is in his ovra quarters I often hear him 
shouting and singing; it is really unbearable. It would 
be a good thing to renounce this last tie also, to cease 
giving way to the vague dreams which all contact with 
dogs unavoidably provokes, no matter how hardened 
one may consider oneself, and to employ the short time 
that still remains for me exclusively in prosecuting my 
researches. The next time he comes I shall slip away, or 
pretend I am asleep, and keep up the pretense until 
he stops visiting me. 

Also my researches have fallen into desuetude, I re- 
lax, I grow weary, I trot mechanically where once I 
raced enthusiastically. I think of the time when I be- 



236 INVESTlGATIOiM.} OF A DOG 

gan to enquire into the question: “Whence does the 
earth procure this food?’' Then indeed I really lived 
among the people, I pushed my way where the crowd 
was thickest, wanted everybody to know my work and 
be my audience, and my audience was even more es- 
sential to me than my work; I still expected to produce 
some effect or other, and that naturally gave me a great 
impetus, which now that I am solitary is gone. But in 
those days I was so full of strength that I achieved some- 
thing unprecedented, something at variance with all 
our principles, and that every contemporary eyewitness 
assuredly recalls now as an uncanny feat. Our scientific 
knowledge, which generally makes for an extreme spe- 
cialization, is remarkably simple in one province. I mean 
where it teaches that the earth engenders our food, and 
then, after having laid down this hypothesis, gives the 
methods by which the different foods may be achieved 
in their best kinds and greatest abundance. Now it is of 
course true that the earth brings forth all food, of that 
there can be no doubt; but as simple as people generally 
imagine it to be the matter is not; and their belief that 
it is simple prevents further enquiry. Take an ordinary 
occurrence that happens every day. If we were to be 
quite inactive, as I am almost completely now, and after 
a perfunctory scratching and watering of the soil lie 
down and wait for what was to come, then we should 
find the food on the ground, assuming, that is, that a 
result of some kind is inevitable. Nevertheless that is not 
what usually happens. Those who have preserved even 
a little freedom of judgment on scientific matters — and 
their numbers are truly small, for science draws a wider 



INVESTIGATIONS OF A DOG 23^ 

and wider circle round itself — ^will easily see, without 
having to make any specific experiment, that the main 
part of the food that is discovered on the ground in such 
cases comes from above; indeed customarily we snap up 
most of our food, according to our dexterity and greed, 
before it has reached the ground at all. In saying that, 
however, I am saying nothing against science; the earth, 
of course, brings forth this kind of food too. Whether 
the earth draws one kind of food out of itself and calls 
down another kind from the skies perhaps makes no 
essential difference, and science, which has established 
that in both cases it is necessary to prepare the ground, 
need not perhaps concern itself with such distinctions, 
for does it not say: “If you have food in your jaws you 
have solved all questions for the time being.'' But it 
seems to me that science nevertheless takes a veiled in- 
terest, at least to some extent, in these matters, inasmuch 
as it recognizes two chief methods of procuring food; 
namely the actual preparation of the ground, and sec- 
ondly the auxiliary perfecting processes of incantation, 
dance, and song. I find here a distinction in accordance 
with the one I have myself made; not a definitive dis- 
tinction, perhaps, but yet clear enough. The scratching 
and watering of the ground, in my opinion, serves to 
produce both kinds of food, and remains indispensable; 
incantation, dance, and song, however, are concerned 
less with the ground food in the narrower sense, and 
serve principally to attract the food from above. Tradi- 
tion fortifies me in this interpretation. The ordinary 
dogs themselves set science right here without knowing 
it, and without science being able to venture a word in 



238 INVESTIGATIONS OF A DOG 

reply. If, as science claims, these ceremonies minister 
only to the soil, giving it the potency, let us say, to attract 
food from the air, then logically they should be directed 
exclusively to the soil; it is the soil that the incantations 
must be whispered to, the soil that must be danced to. 
And to the best of my knowledge science ordains nothing 
else than this. But now comes the remarkable thing; 
the people in all their ceremonies gaze upwards. This 
is no insult to science, since science does not forbid it, 
but leaves the husbandman complete freedom in this 
respect; in its teaching it takes only the soil into account, 
and if the husbandman carries out its instructions con- 
cerning the preparation of the ground it is content; yet, 
in my opinion, it should really demand more than this 
if it is logical. And, though I have never been deeply 
initiated into science, I simply cannot conceive how the 
learned can bear to let our people, unruly and passion- 
ate as they a.re, chant their incantations with their faces 
turned upwards, wail our ancient folk songs into the 
air, and spring high in their dances as though, forgetting 
the ground, they wished to take flight from it forever. 
I took this contradiction as my starting-point, and when- 
ever, according to the teachings of science, the harvest 
time was approaching, I restricted my attention to the 
ground, it was the ground that I scratched in the dance, 
and I almost gave myself a crick in the neck keeping 
my head as close to the ground as I could. Later I dug 
a hole for my nose, and sang and declaimed into it so 
that only the ground might hear, and nobody else beside 
or above me. 

The results of my experiment were meagre. Some- 



INVESTIGATIONS OF A DOG 239 

times the food did not appear, and I was already pre- 
paring to rejoice at this proof, but then the food would 
appear; it was exactly as if my strange performance had 
caused some confusion at first, but had shown itself later 
to possess advantages, so that in my case the usual bark- 
ing and leaping could be dispensed with. Often, indeed, 
the food appeared in greater abundance than formerly, 
but then again it would stay away altogether. With a 
diligence hitherto unknown in a young dog I drew up 
exact reports of all my experiments, fancied that here 
and there I was on a scent that might lead me further, 
but then it lost itself again in obscurity. My inadequate 
grounding in science also undoubtedly held me up here. 
What guarantee had I, for instance, that the absence 
of the food was not caused by unscientific preparation 
of the ground rather than by my experiments, and if 
that should be so, then all my conclusions were inva- 
lid, In certain circumstances I might have been able 
to achieve an almost scrupulously exact experiment; 
namely, if I had succeeded only once in bringing down 
food by an upward incantation without preparing the 
ground at all, and then had failed to extract food by an 
incantation directed exclusively to the ground. I at- 
tempted indeed something of this kind, but without 
any real belief in it and without the conditions being 
quite perfect; for it is my fixed opinion that a certain 
amount of ground-preparation is always necessary, and 
even if the heretics who deny this are right, their theory 
can never be proved in any case, seeing that the water- 
ing of the ground is done under a kind of compulsion, 
and within certain limits simply cannot be avoided. An^ 



240 INVESTIGATIONS OF A DOG 

Other and somewhat tangential experiment succeeded 
better and aroused some public attention. Arguing from 
the customary method of snatching food while still in 
the air, I decided to allow the food to fall to the ground, 
but to make no effort to snatch it. Accordingly I always 
made a small jump in the air when the food appeared, 
but timed it so that it might always fail of its object; in 
the majority of instances the food fell dully and indiffer- 
ently to the ground in spite of this, and I flung myself 
furiously upon it, with the fury both of hunger and of 
disappointment. But in isolated cases something else 
happened, something really strange; the food did not 
fall but followed me through the air; the food pursued 
the hungry. That never went on for long, always for only 
a short stretch, then the food fell after all, or vanished 
completely, or — the most common case — my greed put a 
premature end to the experiment and I swallowed down 
the tempting food. All the same I was happy at that 
time, a stir of curiosity ran through my neighborhood, 
I attracted uneasy attention, I found my acquaintances 
more accessible to my questions, I could see in their eyes 
a gleam that seemed like an appeal for help; and even 
if it was only the reflection of my own glance I asked for 
nothing more, I was satisfied. Until at last I discovered 
— and the others discovered it simultaneously — that this 
experiment of mine was a commonplace of science, had 
already succeeded with others far more brilliantly than 
with me, and though it had not been attempted for a 
long time on account of the extreme self-control it re- 
quired, had also no need to be repeated, for scientifically 
it had no value at all. It only proved what was already 



INVESTIGATIONS OF A DOG S4I 

known, that the ground not only attracts food vertically 
from above, but also at a slant, indeed sometimes in 
spirals. So there I was left with my experiment, but I 
was not discouraged, I was too young for that; on the 
contrary, this disappointment braced me to attempt 
perhaps the greatest achievement of my life. I did not 
believe the scientists’ depreciations of my experiment, 
yet belief was of no avail here, but only proof, and I 
resolved to set about establishing that and thus raise 
my experiment from its original irrelevance and set it 
in the very center of the field of research. I wished to 
prove that when I retreated before the food it was not 
the ground that attracted it at a slant, but I who drew 
it after me. This first experiment, it is true, I could not 
carry any farther; to see the food before one and experi- 
ment in a scientific spirit at the same time — one cannot 
keep that up indefinitely. But I decided to do some- 
thing else; I resolved to fast completely as long as I 
could stand it, and at the same time avoid all sight of 
food, all temptation. If I were to withdraw myself 
in this manner, remain lying day and night with 
closed eyes, trouble myself neither to snatch food from 
the air nor to lift it from the ground, and if, as I dared 
not expect, yet faintly hoped, without taking any of the 
customary measures, and merely in response to the un- 
avoidable irrational watering of the ground and the 
quiet recitation of the incantations and songs (the dance 
I wished to omit, so as not weaken my powers) the food 
were to come of itself from above, and without going 
near the ground were to knock at my teeth for admit- 
tance — if that were to happen, then, even if science was 



24^ INVESTIGATIONS OF A DOG 

not confuted, for it has enough elasticity to admit ex- 
ceptions and isolated cases — I asked myself what would 
the other dogs say, who fortunately do not possess such 
extreme elasticity? For this would be no exceptional 
case like those handed down by history, such as the in- 
cident, let us say, of the dog who refuses, because of 
bodily illness or trouble of mind, to prepare the ground, 
to track down and seize his food, upon which the whole 
dog community recite magical formulae and by this 
means succeed in making the food deviate from its 
customary route into the jaws of the invalid. I, on the 
contrary, was perfectly sound and at the height of my 
powers, my appetite so splendid that it prevented me 
all day from thinking of anything but itself; I submit- 
ted, moreover, whether it be credited or not, voluntarily 
to my period of fasting, was myself quite able to conjure 
down my own supply of food and wished also to do 
so, and so I asked no assistance from the dog commu- 
nity, and indeed rejected it in the most determined 
manner. 

I sought a suitable place for myself in an outlying 
clump of bushes, where I would have to listen to no 
talk of food, no sound of munching jaws and bones be- 
ing gnawed; I ate my fill for the last time and laid me 
down. As far as possible I wanted to pass my whole 
time with closed eyes; until the food came it would be 
perpetual night for me, even though my vigil might 
last for days or weeks. During that time, however, I 
dared not sleep much, better indeed if I did not sleep 
at all — and that made everything much harder — for I 
must not only conjure the food down from the air, but 



INVESTIGATIONS OF A DOG 243 

also be on my guard lest I should be asleep when it ar- 
rived; yet on the other hand sleep would be very wel- 
come to me, for I would manage to fast much longer 
asleep than awake. For those reasons I decided to ar- 
range my time prudently and sleep a great deal, but 
always in short snatches. I achieved this by always rest- 
ing my head while I slept on some frail twig, which 
soon snapped and so awoke me. So there I lay, sleeping 
or keeping watch, dreaming or singing quietly to my- 
self. My first vigils passed uneventfully; perhaps in the 
place whence the food came no one had yet noticed 
that I was lying there in resistance to the normal course 
of things, and so there was no sign. I was a little dis- 
turbed in my concentration by the fear that the other 
dogs might miss me, presently find me, and attempt 
something or other against me. A second fear was that 
at the mere wetting of the ground, though it was un- 
fruitful ground according to the findings of science, 
some chance nourishment might appear and seduce 
me by its smell. But for a time nothing of that kind 
happened and I could go on fasting. Apart from such 
fears I was more calm during this first stage than I 
could remember ever having been before. Although 
in reality I was laboring to annul the findings of sci- 
ence, I felt within me a deep reassurance, indeed al- 
most the proverbial serenity of the scientific worker. 
In my thoughts I begged forgiveness of science; there 
must be room in it for my researches too; consolingly 
in my ears rang the assurance that no matter how great 
the effect of my enquiries might be, and indeed the 
greater the better, I would not be lost to ordinary dog 



244 INVESTIGATIONS OF A DOG 

life; science regarded my attempts with benevolence, 
it itself would undertake the interpretation of my dis- 
coveries, and that promise already meant fulfilment; 
while until now I had felt outlawed in my innermost 
heart and had run my head against the traditional walls 
of my species like a savage, I would now be accepted 
with great honor, the long-yearned-for warmth of as- 
sembled canine bodies would lap me round, I would 
ride uplifted high on the shoulders of my fellows. Re- 
markable effects of my first hunger. My achievement 
seemed so great to me that I began to weep with emo- 
tion and self-pity there among the quiet bushes, which 
it must be confessed was not very understandable, for 
when I was looking forward to my well-earned reward 
why should I weep? Probably out of pure happiness. It 
is always when I am happy, and that is seldom enough, 
that I weep. After that, however, these feelings soon 
passed. My beautiful fancies fled one by one before the 
increasing urgency of my hunger; a little longer and I 
was, after an abrupt farewell to all my imaginations 
and my sublime feelings, totally alone with the hunger 
burning in my entrails. “That is my hunger,” I told 
myself countless times during this stage, as if I wanted 
to convince myself that my hunger and I were still two 
things and I could shake it off like a burdensome lover; 
but in reality we were very painfully one, and when I 
explained to myself; “That is my hunger,” it was really 
my hunger that was speaking and having its joke at my 
expense. A bad, bad time! I still shudder to think of it. 
and not merely, please note this, on account of the suf- 
fering I endured then, but because I know I was insuf- 



INVESTIGATIONS OJ" A DOG 245 

ficiently equipped then and consequently shall have 
to live through that suffering once more if I am ever 
to achieve anything; for today I still hold fasting to 
be the final and most potent weapon of research. The 
way goes through fasting; the highest, if it is attain- 
able, is attainable only by the highest effort, and the 
highest effort among us is voluntary fasting. So when 
I think of those times — and I would gladly pass my life 
in brooding over them — I cannot help thinking also of 
the time that still threatens me. It seems to me that it 
takes almost a lifetime to recuperate from such an at- 
tempt; my whole life as an adult lies between me and 
that fast, and I have not recovered yet. When I begin 
upon my next fast I shall perhaps have more resolu- 
tion than the first time, because of my greater experi- 
ence and deeper insight into the need for the attempt, 
but my powers are still enfeebled by that first essay, 
and so I shall probably begin to fail at the mere ap- 
proach of these familiar horrors. My weaker appetite 
will not help me; it will reduce the value of the at- 
tempt only by a very little, and will, indeed, probably 
force me to fast longer than was necessary the first 
time. I think I am clear on these and many other mat- 
ters, the long interval has not been wanting in trial at- 
tempts, often enough I have literally got my teeth into 
hunger; but I was not still strong enough for the ulti- 
mate effort, and now the unspoilt ardor of youth is 
of course gone forever. It vanished in the great priva- 
tions of that first fast. All sorts of thoughts tormented 
me. Our forefathers appeared threateningly before me. 
True, I held them responsible for everything, even 



246 INVESTIGATIONS OF A DOG 

if I dared not say so openly; it was they who involved 
our dog life in guilt, and so I could easily have re- 
sponded to their menaces with countermenaces; but I 
bow before their knowledge, it came from sources of 
which we know no longer, and for that reason, much 
as I may feel compelled to oppose them, I shall never 
actually overstep their laws, but content myself with 
wriggling out through the gaps, for which I have a 
particularly good nose. On the question of fasting I 
appealed to the well-known dialogue in the course of 
which one of our sages once expressed the intention 
of forbidding fasting, but was dissuaded by a second 
with the words: “But who would ever think of fasting?” 
whereupon the first sage allowed himself to be per- 
suaded and withdrew the prohibition. But now arises 
the question: “Is not fasting really forbidden after all?” 
The great majority of commentators deny this and re- 
gard fasting as freely permitted, and holding as they 
think with the second sage do not worry in the least 
about the evil consequences that may result from er- 
roneous interpretations. I had naturally assured myself 
on this point before I began my fast. But now that I 
was twisted with the pangs of hunger, and in my dis- 
tress of mind sought relief in my own hind legs, de- 
spairingly licking and gnawing at them up to the very 
buttocks, the universal interpretation of this dialogue 
seemed to me entirely and completely false, I cursed 
the commentators’ science, I cursed myself for having 
been led astray by it; for the dialogue contained, as any 
child could see, more than merely one prohibition of 
fasting; the first sage wished to forbid fasting; what a 



INVESTIGATIONS OF A DOG 247 

sage wishes is already done, so fasting was forbidden; 
as for the second sage, he not only agreed with the first, 
but actually considered fasting impossible, piled there- 
fore on the first prohibition a second, that of dog na- 
ture itself; the first sage saw this and thereupon with- 
drew the explicit prohibition, that was to say, he 
imposed upon all dogs, the matter being now settled, 
the obligation to know themselves and to make their 
own prohibitions regarding fasting. So here was a 
threefold prohibition instead of merely one, and I had 
violated it. Now I could at least have obeyed at this 
point, though tardily, but in the midst of my pain I 
felt a longing to go on fasting, and I followed it as 
greedily as if it were a strange dog. I could not stop; 
perhaps too I was already too weak to get up and seek 
safety for myself in familiar scenes. I tossed about on 
the fallen forest leaves, I could no longer sleep, I heard 
noises on every side; the world, which had been asleep 
during my life hitherto, seemed to have been awakened 
by my fasting, I was tortured by the fancy that I would 
never be able to eat again, and I must eat so as to re- 
duce to silence this world rioting so noisily round me, 
and I would never be able to do so; but the great- 
est noise of all came from my own belly, I often laid my 
ear against it with startled eyes, for I could hardly be- 
lieve what I heard. And now that things were becom- 
ing unendurable my very nature seemed to be seized 
by the general frenzy, and made senseless attempts to 
save itself; the smell of food began to assail me, deli- 
cious dainties that I had long since forgotten, delights 
of my childhood; yes, I could smell the very fragrance 



248 INVESTIGATIONS OF A DOG 

of my mother’s teats; I forgot my resolution to resist 
all smells, or rather I did not forget it; I dragged my- 
self to and fro, never for more than a few yards, and 
sniffed as if that were in accordance with my resolu- 
tion, as if I were looking for food simply to be on my 
guard against it. The fact that I found nothing did not 
disappoint me; the food must be there, only it was al- 
ways a few steps away, my legs failed me before I could 
reach it. But simultaneously I knew that nothing was 
there, and that I made those feeble movements simply 
out of fear lest I might collapse in this place and never 
be able to leave it. My last hopes, my last dreams van- 
ished; I would perish here miserably; of what use were 
my researches? — childish attempts undertaken in child- 
ish and far happier days; here and now was the 
hour of deadly earnest, here my enquiries should have 
shown their value, but where had they vanished? Only 
a dog lay here helplessly snapping at the empty air, a 
dog who, though he still watered the ground with con- 
vulsive haste at short intervals and without being aware 
ot iu couM not remember even the shortest of the 
countless incantations stored in his memory, not even 
the little rhyme which the newly-born puppy says when 
it snuggles under its mother. It seemed to me as if I 
were separated from all my fellows, not by a quite short 
stretch, but by an infinite distance, and as if I would 
die less of hunger than of neglect. For it was clear that 
nobody troubled about me, nobody beneath the earth, 
on it, or above it; I was dying of their indifference; 
they said indifferently: “He is dying,” and it would ac- 
tually come to pass. And did I not myself assent? Did 



INVESTIGATIONS OF A DOG 249 

I not say the same thing? Had I not wanted to be for- 
saken like this? Yes, brothers, but not so as to perish 
in that place, but to achieve truth and escape from this 
world of falsehood, where there is no one from whom 
you can learn the truth, not even from me, born as I 
am a citizen of falsehood. Perhaps the truth was not so 
very far off, and I not so forsaken, therefore, as I 
thought; or I may have been forsaken less by my fel- 
lows than by myself, in yielding and consenting to die. 

But one does not die so easily as a nervous dog im- 
agines. I merely fainted, and when I came to and raised 
my eyes a strange hound was standing before me. I did 
not feel hungry, but rather filled with strength, and my 
limbs, it seemed to me, were light and agile, though I 
made no attempt to prove this by getting to my feet. 
My visual faculties in themselves were no keener than 
usual, a beautiful but not at all extraordinary hound 
stood before me; I could see that, and that was all, and 
yet it seemed to me that I saw something more in him. 
There was blood under me, at first I took it for food; 
but I recognized it immediately as blood that I had 
vomited. I turned my eyes from it to the strange hound. 
He was lean, long-legged, brown with a patch of white 
here and there, and had a fine, strong, piercing glance. 
‘'What are you doing here?” he asked. "You must leave 
this place.” "I can’t leave it just now,” I said, without 
trying to explain, for how could I explain everything 
to him; besides, he seemed to be in a hurry. "Please go 
away,” he said, impatiently lifting his feet and setting 
them down again. "Let me be,” I said, "leave me to 
myself and don’t worry about me; the others don’t.” 



250 INVESTIGATIONS OF A DOG 

“I ask you to go for your own sake/' he said. “You can 
ask for any reason you like/' I replied. “I can't go even 
if I wanted to." “You need have no fear of that," he 
said, smiling. “You can go all right. It’s because you 
seem to be feeble that I ask you to go now, and you can 
go slowly if you like; if you linger now you'll have to 
race off later on.” “That's my affair," I replied. “It's 
mine too/’ he said, saddened by my stubbornness, yet 
obviously resolved to let me lie for the time being, but 
at the same time to seize the opportunity of paying 
court to me. At any other time I would gladly have 
submitted to the blandishments of such a beautiful 
creature, but at that moment, why, I cannot tell, the 
thought filled me with terror. “Get out!" I screamed, 
and all the louder as I had no other means of protect- 
ing myself. “All right, I'll leave you then,” he said, 
slowly retreating. “You're wonderful. Don't I please 
you?” “You’ll please me by going away and leaving me 
in peace,” I said, but I was no longer so sure of myself 
as I tried to make him think. My senses, sharpened 
by fasting, suddenly seemed to see or hear something 
about him; it was just beginning, it was growing, it 
came nearer, and I knew that this hound had the power 
to drive me away, even if I could not imagine to myself 
at the moment how I was ever to get to my feet. And I 
gazed at him — he had merely shaken his head sadly at 
my rough answer — with ever-mounting desire. “Who 
are you?” I asked. “I'm a hunter,” he replied. “And 
why won't you let me lie here?" I asked. “You disturb 
me,” he said. “I can't hunt while you’re here.” “Try,” 
I said, “perhaps you’ll be able to hunt after all.” “No,” 



INVESTIGATIONS OF A DOG 25I 

he said, “I’m sorry, but you must go.” “Don’t hunt foT 
this one day!” I implored him. “No,” he said, “I must 
hunt.” “I must go; you must hunt,” I said, “nothing 
but musts. Can you explain to me why we must?” “No,” 
he replied, “but there’s nothing that needs to be ex- 
plained, these are natural, self-evident things.” “Not 
quite so self-evident as all that,” I said, “you’re sorry 
that you must drive me away, and yet you do it.” 
“That’s so,” he replied. “That’s so,” I echoed him 
crossly, “that isn’t an answer. Which sacrifice would 
you rather make; to give up your hunting, or give up 
driving me away?” “To give up my hunting,” He said 
without hesitation. “There!” said I, “don’t you see that 
you’re contradicting yourself?” “How am I contradict- 
ing myself?” he replied. “My dear little dog, can it be 
that you really don’t understand that I must? Don’t 
you understand the most self-evident fact?” I made no 
answer, for I noticed — and new life ran through me, 
life such as terror gives — I noticed from almost invis- 
ible indications, which perhaps nobody but mysell 
could have noticed, that in the depths of his chest the 
hound was preparing to upraise a song. “You’re going 
to sing,” I said. “Yes,” he replied gravely, “I’m going 
to sing, soon, but not yet.” “You’re beginning already,’ 

I said. “No,” he said, “not yet. But be prepared.” “I 
can hear it already, though you deny it,” I said, trem- 
bling. He was silent, and then I thought I saw some- 
thing such as no dog before me had ever seen, at least 
there is no slightest hint of it in our tradition, and I 
hastily bowed my head in infinite fear and shame in 
the pool of blood lying before me. J thought I saw that 



INVESTIGATIONS OF A DOG 


252 

the hound was already singing without knowing it, nay, 
more, that the melody, separated from him, was float- 
ing on the air in accordance with its own laws, and, as 
though he had no part in it, was moving towards me, 
towards me alone. Today, of course, I deny the valid- 
ity of all such perceptions and ascribe them to my over- 
excitation at that time, but even if it was an error it 
had nevertheless a sort of gi^andeur, and is the sole, 
even if delusive, reality that I have carried over into 
this world from my period of fasting, and shows at least 
how far we can go when we are beyond ourselves. And 
I was actually quite beyond myself. In ordinary cir- 
cumstances I would have been very ill, incapable of 
moving; but the melody, which the hound soon seemed 
to acknowledge as his, was quite irresistible. It grew 
stronger and stronger; its waxing power seemed to have 
no limits, and already almost burst my ear-drums. But 
the worst was that it seemed to exist solely for my sake, 
this voice before whose sublimity the Woods fell silent 
to exist solely for my sake; who was 1, that I could dare 
to remain here, lying brazenly before it in my pool of 
blood and filth. I tottered to my feet and looked down 
at myself; this wretched body can never run, I still had 
time to think, but already, spurred on by the melody, 
I was careering from the spot in splendid style. I said 
nothing to my friends; probably I could have told them 
all when I first arrived, but I was too feeble, and later 
it seemed to me that such things could not be told. 
Hints which I could not refrain from occasionally drop- 
ping were quite lost in the general conversation. For 



INVESTIGATIONS OF A DOG 253 

the rest I recovered physically in a few hours, but spir- 
itually I still suffer from the effects of that experiment. 

Nevertheless, I next carried my researches into mu- 
sic. True, science had not been idle in this sphere 
either; the science of music, if I am correctly informed, 
is perhaps still more comprehensive than that of nur- 
ture, and in any case established on a firmer basis. That 
may be explained by the fact that this province admits 
of more objective enquiry than the other, and its knowl- 
edge is more a matter of pure observation and systema- 
tization, while in the province of food the main object 
is to achieve practical results. That is the reason why 
the science of music is accorded greater esteem than 
that of nurture, but also why the former has never pen- 
etrated so deeply into the life of the people. I myself 
felt less attracted to the science of music than to any 
other until I heard that voice in the forest. My experi- 
ence with the musical dogs had indeed drawn my at- 
tention to music, but I was still too young at that time. 
Nor is it by any means easy even to come to grips with 
that science; it is regarded as very esoteric and politely 
excludes the crowd. Besides, although what struck me 
most deeply at first about these dogs was their music^ 
their silence seemed to me still more significant; as fot 
their alBPrighting music, probably it was quite unique, 
so that I could leave it out of account; but thenceforth 
their silence confronted me everywhere and in all the 
dogs I met. So for penetrating into real dog nature re- 
search into food seemed to me the best method, calcm 
fated to lead me to my goal by the straightest path. 



254 INVESTIGATIONS OF A DOG 

Perhaps I was mistaken. A border region between thesi': 
two sciences, however, had already attracted my atten- 
tion. I mean the theory of incantation, by which food 
is called down. Here again it is very much against me 
that I have never seriously tackled the science of music 
and in this sphere cannot even count myself among the 
half-educated, the class on whom science looks down 
most of all. This fact I cannot get away from. I could 
not — I have proof of that, unfortunately — I could not 
pass even the most elementary scientific examination 
set by an authority on the subject. Of course, quite 
apart from the circumstances already mentioned, the 
reason for that can be found in my incapacity for sci- 
entific investigation, my limited powers of thought, my 
bad memory, but above all in my inability to keep my 
scientific aim continuously before my eyes. All this I 
frankly admit, even with a certain degree of pleasure. 
For the more profound cause of my scientific incapac- 
ity seems to me to be an instinct, and indeed by no 
means a bad one. If I wanted to brag I might say that 
it was this very instinct that invalidated my scientific 
capacities, for it would surely be a very extraordinary 
thing if one who shows a tolerable degree of intelli- 
gence in dealing with the ordinary daily business of 
life, which certainly cannot be called simple, and more- 
over one whose findings have been checked and veri- 
fied, where that was possible, by individual scientists 
if not by science itself, should a priori be incapable of 
planting his paw even on the first rung of the ladder of 
science. It was this instinct that made me — ^and perhaps 
for the sake of science itself, but a different science 



INVESTIGATIONS OF A DOG 


255 

from that o£ today, an ultimate science — prize freedom 
higher than everything else. Freedom! Certainly such 
freedom as is possible today is a wretched business. 
But nevertheless freedom, nevertheless a possession. 



The Burrow 


I HAVE COMPLETED the construction of my burrow and 
it seems to be successful. All that can be seen fr^m out- 
side is a big hole; that, however, really leads nowhere; 
if you take a few steps you strike against natural firm 
rock. I can make no boast of having contrived this ruse 
intentionally; it is simply the remains of one of my 
many abortive building attempts, but finally it seemed 
to me advisable to leave this one hole without filling 
it in. True, some ruses are so subtle that they defeat 
themselves, I know that better than any one, and it is 
certainly a risk to draw attention by this hole to the fact 
that there may be something in the vicinity worth en- 
quiring into. But you do not know me if you think I am 
afraid, or that I built my burrow simply out of fear. At 
a distance of some thousand paces from this hole lies, 
covered by a movable layer of moss, the real entrance 
to the burrow; it is secured as safely as anything in this 
world can be secured; yet some one could step on the 
moss or break through it, and then my burrow would 
lie open, and anybody who liked — please note, however, 
that quite uncommon abilities would also be required 
. — could make his way in and destroy everything for 

256 



THE BURRO^V 


257 

good. I know that very well, and even now that I am 
better off than ever before I can scarcely pass an hour 
in complete tranquillity; at that one point in the dark 
moss I am vulnerable, and in my dreams I often see a 
greedy muzzle sniffing round it persistently. It will be 
objected that I could quite well have filled in the en- 
trance too, with a thin layer of hard earth on top and 
with loose soil further down, so that it would not cost 
me much trouble to dig my way out again whenever I 
liked. But that plan is impossible; prudence itself de 
mands*that I should have a way of leaving at a mo- 
ment's notice if necessary, prudence itself demands, as 
alas! so often, the element of risk in life. All this in- 
volves very laborious calculation, and the sheer pleas- 
ure of the mind in its own keenness is often the sole 
reason why one keeps it up. I must have a way of leav- 
ing at a moment's notice, for, despite all my vigilance, 
may I not be attacked from some quite unexpected 
quarter? I live in peace in the inmost chamber of my 
house, and meanwhile the enemy may be burrowing 
his way slowly and stealthily straight towards me. I do 
not say that he has a better scent than I; probably he 
knows as little about me as I of him. But there are 
insatiable robbers who burrow blindly through the 
ground, and to whom the very size of my house gives 
the hope of hitting by chance on some of its far-flung 
passages. I certainly have the advantage of being in my 
own house and knowing all the passages and how they 
run. A robber may very easily become my victim and a 
succulent one too. But I am growing old; I am not as 
strong as many others, and my enemies are countless; 



THE BURROW 


1158 

it could well happen that in flying from one enemy I 
might run into the jaws of another. Anything might 
happen! In any case I must have the confident knowl- 
edge that somewhere there is an exit easy to reach and 
quite free, where I have to do nothing whatever to get 
out, so that I might never — Heaven shield us! — sud- 
denly feel the teeth of the pursuer in my flank while I 
am desperately burrowing away, even if it is at loose 
easy soil. And it is not only by external enemies that I 
am threatened. There are also enemies in the bowels 
of the earth. I have never seen them, but legend tells 
of them and I firmly believe in them. They are crea- 
tures of the inner earth; not even legend can describe 
them. Their very victims can scarcely have seen them; 
they come, you hear the scratching of their claws just 
under you in the ground, which is their element, and 
already you are lost. Here it is of no avail to console 
yourself with the thought that you are in your own 
house; far rather are you in theirs. Not even my exit 
could save me from them; indeed in all probability it 
would not save me in any case, but rather betray me; 
yet it is a hope, and I cannot live without it. Apart from 
this main exit I am also connected with the outer world 
by quite narrow, tolerably safe passages which provide 
me with good fresh air to breathe. They are the work 
of the field mice. I have made judicious use of them, 
transforming them into an organic part of my burrow. 
They also give me the possibility of scenting things 
from afar, and thus serve as a protection. All sorts of 
small fry, too, come running through them, and I de- 
vour these; so I can have a certain amount of subter- 



xni:. rsuKiici^w 


^59 

ranean hunting, sufficient for a modest way of life, 
without leaving my burrow at all; and that is naturally 
a great advantage. 

But the most beautiful thing about my burrow is the 
stillness. Of course, that is deceitful. At any moment it 
may be shattered and then all will be over. For the time 
being, however, the silence is still with me. For hours 
I can stroll through my passages and hear nothing ex- 
cept the rustling of some little creature, which I imme- 
diately reduce to silence between my jaws, or the pat- 
tering of soil, which draws my attention to the need for 
repair; otherwise all is still. The fragrance of the woods 
floats in; the place feels both warm and cool. Sometimes 
I lie down and roll about in the passage with pure joy. 
When autumn sets in to possess a burrow like mine, 
and a roof over your head, is great good fortune for any 
one getting on in years. Every hundred yards I have 
widened the passages into little round cells; there I can 
curl myself up in comfort and lie warm. There I sleep 
the sweet sleep of tranquillity, of satisfied desire, of 
achieved ambition; for I possess a house. I do not knov/ 
whether it is a habit that still persists from former days, 
or whether the perils even of this house of mine are 
great enough to awaken me; but invariably every now 
and then I start up out of profound sleep and listen, 
listen into the stillness which reigns here unchanged 
day and night, smile contentedly and then sink with 
loosened limbs into still profounder sleep. Poor home'- 
less wanderers in the roads and woods, creeping for 
warmth into a heap of leaves or a herd of their com- 
rades, delivered to all the perils of heaven and earthi 



g6o 


THE BURROW 


I lie here in a room secured on every side — there are 
more than fifty such rooms in my burrow — and pass as 
much of my time as I choose between dozing and um 
conscious sleep. 

Not quite in the center of the burrow, carefully 
chosen to serve as a refuge in case of extreme danger 
from siege if not from immediate pursuit, lies the chief 
cell. While all the rest of the burrow is the outcome 
rather of intense intellectual than of physical labor, 
this Castle Keep was fashioned by the most arduous 
labor of my whole body. Several times, in the despair 
brought on by physical exhaustion, I was on the point 
of giving up the whole business, flung myself down 
panting and cursed the burrow, dragged myself out- 
side and left the place lying open to all the world. I 
could afford to do that, for I had no longer any wish to 
return to it, until at last, after four hours or days, back 
I went repentantly, and when I saw that the burrow 
was unharmed I could almost have raised a hymn of 
thanksgiving, and in sincere gladness of heart started 
on the work anew. My labors on the Castle Keep were 
also made harder, and unnecessarily so (unnecessarily 
in that the burrow derived no real benefit from those 
labors) by the fact that just at the place where, accord- 
ing to my calculations, the Castle Keep should be, the 
soil was very loose and sandy and had literally to be 
hammered and pounded into a firm state to serve as a 
wall for the beautifully vaulted chamber. But for such 
tasks the only tool I possess is my forehead. So I had 
to run with my forehead thousands and thousands of 
times, for whole days and nights, against the ground, 



THE BURROW 


£65 

and I was glad when the blood came, for that was a 
proof that the walls were beginning to harden; and in 
that way, as everybody must admit, I richly paid for my 
Castle Keep. 

In the Castle Keep I assemble my stores; everything 
over and above my daily wants that I capture inside the 
burrow, and everything I bring back with me from my 
hunting expeditions outside, I pile up here. The place 
is so spacious that food for half a year scarcely fills it. 
Consequently I can divide up my stores, walk about 
among them, play with them, enjoy their plenty and 
their various smells, and reckon up exactly how much 
they represent. That done, I can always arrange accord 
ingly, and make my calculations and hunting plans for 
the future, taking into account the season of the year. 
There are times when I am so well provided for that in 
my indifference to food I never even touch the smaller 
fry that scuttle about the burrow, which, however, is 
probably imprudent of me. My constant preoccupation 
with defensive measures involves a frequent alteration 
or modification, though within narrow limits, of my 
views on how the building can best be organized for 
that end. Then it sometimes seems risky to make the 
Castle Keep the basis of defense; the ramifications of 
the burrow present me with manifold possibilities, and 
it seems more in accordance with prudence to divide 
up my stores somewhat, and put part of them in certain 
of the smaller rooms; thereupon I mark off every third 
room, let us say, as a reserve store-room, or every fourth 
room as a main and every second as an auxiliary 
storeroom, and so forth. Or I ignore certain passages 



262 


THE BURROW 


altogether and store no food in them, so as to throw any 
enemy off the scent, or I choose quite at random a very 
few rooms according to their distance from the main 
exit. Each of tliese new plans involves of course heavy 
work; I have to make my calculations and then carry 
my stores to their new places. True, I can do that at my 
leisure and without any hurry, and it is not at all un- 
pleasant to carry such good food in your jaws, to lie 
down and rest whenever you like, and, which is an ac- 
tual pleasure, to have an occasional nibble. But it is not 
so pleasant when, as sometimes happens, you suddenly 
fancy, starting up from your sleep, that the present dis- 
tribution of your stores is completely and totally wrong, 
capable of leading to great dangers, and must be set 
right at once, no matter how tired or sleepy you may 
be; then I rush, then I fly, then I have no time for cal- 
culation,- as I am burning to execute my perfectly new, 
perfectly satisfactory plan, I seize whatever my teeth 
hit upon and drag it or carry it away, sighing, groaning, 
stumbling, and nothing will content me but some radi- 
cal alteration of the present state of things, which seems 
imminently dangerous. Until little by little full wake- 
fulness sobers me, and I can hardly understand my 
panic haste, breathe in deeply the tranquillity of 
my house, which I myself have disturbed, return to my 
resting-place, fall asleep at once in a new-won exhaus- 
tion, and on awakening find hanging from my jaws, say, 
a rat, as indubitable proof of night labors which al- 
ready seem almost unreal. Then again there are times 
when the storing of all my food in one place seems the 
best plan of all. Of what use to me could my stores in 



THE BURROW 263 

the smaller rooms be, how much could I store there in 
any case? And whatever I put there would block the 
passage, and be a greater hindrance than help to me if 
I were pursued and had to fly. Besides, it is stupid but 
true that one's self-conceit suffers if one cannot see all 
one's stores together, and so at one glance know how 
much one possesses. And in dividing up my food in 
those various ways might not a great deal get lost? I 
can’t be always scouring through all my passages and 
cross'passages so as to make sure that everything is in 
order. The idea of dividing up my stores is of course a 
good one, but only if one had several rooms similar to 
Qiy Castle Keep. Several such rooms! Indeed! And who 
is to build them? In any case they could not be worked 
into the general plan of my burrow at this late stage. 
But I will admit that that is a fault in my burrow; it is 
always a fault to have only one copy of anything. And 
I confess too that during the whole time I was construct- 
ing the burrow a vague divination that I should have 
more such cells stirred in my mind, vaguely, yet clearly 
enough if I had only welcomed it; I did not yield to it, 
I felt too feeble for the enormous labor it would in- 
volve, more, I felt too feeble even to admit to myself 
the necessity for that labor, and comforted myself as 
best I could with the vague hope that a building which 
in any other case would clearly be inadequate, would 
in my own unique, exceptional, favored case suffice, 
presumably, because providence was interested in tht 
preservation of my forehead, that unique instrument. 
So I have only one Castle Keep, but my dark premoni- 
tions that one would not suffice have faded. However 



THE BURROW 


264 

that may be I must content myself with the one big 
chamber, the smaller ones are simply no substitute for 
it, and so, when this conviction has grown on me, I be- 
gin once more to haul all my stores back from them to 
the Castle Keep. For some time afterwards I find a cer- 
tain comfort in having all the passages and rooms free, 
in seeing my stores growing in the Castle Keep and 
emitting their variegated and mingled smells, each of 
which delights me in its own fashion, and every one of 
which I can distinguish even at a distance, as far as the 
very remotest passages. Then I usually enjoy periods of 
particular tranquillity, in which I change my sleeping- 
place by stages, always working in towards the center of 
the burrow, always steeping myself more profoundly 
in the mingled smells, until at last I can no longer re- 
strain myself and one night rush into the Castle Keep, 
mightily fling myself upon my stores, and glut myself 
with the best that I can seize until I am completely 
gorged. Happy, but dangerous hours; any one who 
knew how to exploit them could destroy me with ease 
and without any risk. Here too the absence of a second 
or third large store-room works to my detriment; for 
it is the single huge accumulated mass of food that se- 
duces me. I try to guard myself in various ways against 
this danger; the distribution of my stores in the smaller 
rooms is really one of these expedients; but unfortu- 
nately, like other such expedients, it leads through re- 
nunciation to still greater greed, which, overruling my 
intelligence, makes me arbitrarily alter my plans of de- 
fense to suit its ends. 

To regain my composure after such lapses I make a 



THE BURROW 


265 

practice of reviewing the burrow, and after the neces- 
sary improvements have been carried out, frequently 
leave it, though only for a short spell. At such moments 
the hardship of renouncing it for a long time seems too 
punitive, even to myself, yet I recognize clearly the need 
for my occasional short excursions. It is always with a 
certain solemnity that I approach the exit again. Dur- 
ing my spells of home life I avoid it, steer clear even of 
the outer windings of the corridor that leads to it; be- 
sides, it is no easy job to wander about there, for I have 
contrived there a whole little maze of passages; it was 
there that I began my burrow, at a time when I had no 
hope of ever completing it according to my plans; I be- 
gan, half in play, at that corner, and so my first joy in 
labor found riotous satisfaction there in a labyrinthine 
burrow which at the time seemed to me the crown of 
all burrows, but which I judge today, perhaps with 
more justice, to be too much of an idle tour de force, 
not really worthy of the rest of the burrow, and though 
perhaps theoretically brilliant — here is my main en- 
trance, I said in those days, ironically addressing my 
invisible enemies and seeing them all already caught 
and stifled in the outer labyrinth — is in reality a flimsy 
piece of jugglery that would hardly withstand a serious 
attack or the struggles of an enemy fighting for his life. 
Should I reconstruct this part of my burrow? I keep on 
postponing the decision, and the labyrinth will prob- 
ably remain as it is. Apart from the sheer hard work 
that I should have to face, the task would also be the 
most dangerous imaginable. When I began the burrow 
I could work away at it in comparative peace of mind. 



266 


THE BURROW 


the risk wasn’t much greater than any other risk; but 
to attempt that today would be to draw the whole 
world’s attention, and gratuitously, to my burrow; to- 
day the w^hole thing is impossible. I am almost glad of 
diat, for I still have a certain sentiment about this first 
achievement of mine. And if a serious attack were at- 
tempted, what pattern of entrance at all would be likely 
to save me? An entrance can deceive, can lead astray, 
can give the attacker no end of worry, and the present 
one too can do that at a pinch. But a really serious at- 
tack has to be met by an instantaneous mobilization of 
all the resources in the burrow and all the forces of my 
body and soul — that, of course, is self-evident. So this 
entrance can very well remain where it is. The burrow 
has so many unavoidable defects imposed by natural 
causes that it can surely stand this one defect for which 
I am responsible, and which I recognize as a defect, 
even if only after the event. In spite of that, however, 
I do not deny that this fault worries me from time to 
time, indeed always. If on my customary rounds I avoid 
this part of the burrow, the fundamental reason is be- 
cause the sight of it is painful to me, because I don’t 
want to be perpetually reminded of a defect in my 
house, even if that defect is only too disturbingly pres- 
ent in my mind. Let it continue to exist ineradicably 
at the entrance; I can at least refuse to look at it as long 
as that is possible. If I merely walk in the direction of 
the entrance, even though I may be separated from it 
by several passages and rooms, I find myself sensing an 
atmosphere of great danger, actually as if my hair were 
growing thin and in a moment might fly off and leave 



THE BURROW 


267 

me bare and shivering, exposed to the howls of my en- 
emies. Yes, the mere thought of the door itself brings 
such feelings with it, yet it is the labyrinth leading up 
to it that torments me most of all. Sometimes I dream 
that I have reconstructed it, transformed it completely, 
quickly, in a night, with a giant s strength, nobody hav- 
ing noticed, and now it is impregnable; the nights in 
which such dreams come to me are the sweetest I know, 
tears of joy and deliverance still glisten on my beard 
when I awaken. 

So I must thread the tormenting complications of this 
labyrinth physically as well as mentally whenever I go 
out, and I am both exasperated and touched when, as 
sometimes happens, I lose myself for a moment in my 
own maze, and the work of my hands seems to be still 
doing its best to prove its sufficiency to me, its maker, 
whose final judgment has long since been passed on it. 
But then I find myself beneath the mossy covering, 
which has been left untouched for so long — for I stay 
for long spells in my house — that it has grown fast to the 
soil round it, and now only a little push with my head 
is needed and I am in the upper world. For a long time 
I do not dare to make that little movement, and if it 
were not that I would have to traverse the labyrinth 
once more, I would certainly leave the matter for the 
time being and turn back again. Just think. Your house 
is protected and self-sufficient. You live in peace, warm, 
well-nourished, master, sole master of all your manifold 
passages and rooms, and all this you are prepared, it 
appears, not merely to give up, but actually to abandon; 
you nurse the confident hope, certainly, that you will 



268 


THE BURROW 


regain it; yet is it not a dangerous, a far too dangerous 
stake that you are playing for? Can there be any reason- 
able grounds for such a step? No, for such acts as these 
there can be no reasonable grounds. But all the same 
I then cautiously raise the trap-door and slip outside, 
let it softly fall back again, and fly as fast as I can from 
the treacherous spot. 

Yet I am not really free. True, I am no longer con- 
fined by narrow passages, but rush through the open 
woods, and feel new powers awakening in my body for 
which there was no room, as it were, in the burrow, not 
even in the Castle Keep, though it had been ten times 
as big. The food too is better up here; though hunting 
is more difficult, success more rare, the results are more 
valuable from every point of view; I do not deny all 
this; I appreciate it and take advantage of it as fully as 
most animals, and probably more fully, for I do not 
hunt like a vagrant out of mere idleness or despera- 
tion, but calmly and methodically. Also I am not perma- 
nently doomed to this free life, for I know that my term 
is measured, that I do not have to hunt here forever, 
and that, whenever I am weary of this life and wish to 
leave it, Someone, whose invitation I shall not be able 
to withstand, will, so to speak, summon me to him. And 
so I can pass my time here quite without care and in 
complete enjoyment, or rather I could, and yet I can- 
not. My burrow takes up too much of my thoughts. I 
fled from the entrance fast enough, but soon I am back 
at it again. I seek out a good hiding-place and keep 
watch on the entrance of my house — this time from out- 
side — for whole days and nights. Call it foolish if you 



THE BURROW 


269 

like; it gives me infinite pleasure and reassures me. At 
such times it is as if I were not so much looking at m) 
house as at myself sleeping, and had the joy of being in 
a profound slumber and simultaneously of keeping vig* 
ilant guard over myself. I am privileged, as it were, not 
only to dream about the spectres of the night in all the 
helplessness and blind trust of sleep, but also at the 
same time to confront them in actuality with the calm 
judgment of the fully awake. And strangely enough I 
discover that my situation is not so bad as I had often 
thought, and will probably think again when I return 
to my house. In this connection — it may be in others 
too, but in this one especially — these excursions of mine 
are truly indispensable. Carefully as I have chosen an 
out-of-the-way place for my door, the traffic that passes 
it is nevertheless, if one takes a week's observation, very 
great; but so it is, no doubt, in all inhabited regions^ 
and probably it is actually better to hazard the risks of 
dense traffic, whose very impetus carries it past, than 
to be delivered in complete solitude to the first persist- 
ently searching intruder. Here enemies are numerous 
and their allies and accomplices still more numerous, 
but they fight one another, and while thus employed 
rush past my burrow without noticing it. In all my time 
I have never seen any one investigating the actual door 
of my house, which is fortunate both for me and for 
him, for I would certainly have launched myself at his 
throat, forgetting everything else in my anxiety for the 
burrow. True, intruders come in whose neighborhood 
I dare not remain, and from whom I have to fly as soon 
as I scent them in the distance; on their attitude to the 



THE BURROW 


270 

burrow I really can’t pronounce with certainty, but it 
is at least a reassurance that when I presently return I 
never find any of them there, and the entrance is un- 
damaged. There have been happy periods in which I 
could almost assure myself that the enmity of the world 
towards me had ceased or been assuaged, or that the 
strength of the burrow had raised me above the de- 
structive struggle of former times. The burrow has 
probably protected me in more ways than I thought or 
dared think while I was inside it. This fancy used to 
have such a hold over me that sometimes I have been 
seized by the childish desire never to return to the bur- 
row again, but to settle down somewhere close to the 
entrance, to pass my life watching the entrance, and 
gloat perpetually upon the reflection — and in that find 
my happiness — how steadfast a protection my burrow 
would be if I were inside it. Well, one is soon roughly 
awakened from childish dreams. What does this pro- 
tection which I am looking at here from the outside 
amount to after all? Dare I estimate the danger which 
I run inside the burrow from observations which I 
make when outside? Can my enemies, to begin with, 
have any proper awareness of me if I am not in my bur- 
row? A certain awareness of me they certainly have, 
but not full awareness. And is not that full awareness 
the real definition of a state of danger? So the experi- 
ments I attempt here are only half-experiments or even 
less, calculated merely to reassure my fears and by giv- 
ing me false reassurance to lay me open to great perils. 
No, I do not watch over my own sleep, as I imagined; 
rather it is I who sleep, while the destroyer watches. 



THE BURROW 


271 

Perhaps he is one of those who pass the entrance with- 
out seeming to notice it, concerned merely to ascertain, 
just like myself, that the door is still untouched and 
waits for their attack, and only pass because they know 
that the master of the house is out, or because they are 
quite aware that he is guilelessly lying on the watch in 
the bushes close by. And I leave my post of observation 
and find I have had enough of this outside life; I feel 
that there is nothing more that I can learn here, either 
now or at any time. And I long to say a last good-bye to 
everything up here, to go down into my burrow never 
to return again, let things take their course, and not 
try to retard them with my profitless vigils. But spoilt 
by seeing for such a long time everything that hap^ 
pened round the entrance, I find great difficulty in sum- 
moning the resolution to carry out the actual descent, 
which might easily draw anyone's attention, and with' 
out knowing what is happening behind my back and 
behind the door after it is fastened. I take advantage 
of stormy nights to get over the necessary prelimh 
naries, and quickly bundle in my spoil; that seems to 
have come oflP, but whether it has really come oS will 
only be known when I myself have made the descent; 
it will be known, but not by me, or by me, but too late. 
So I give up the attempt and do not make the descent. 
I dig an experimental burrow, naturally at a good dis- 
tance from the real entrance, a burrow just as long as 
myself, and seal it also with a covering of moss. I creep 
into my hole, close it after me, wait patiently, keep 
vigil for long or short spells, and at various hours of the 
day, then fling off the moss, issue from my hole, and 



THE BURROW 


272 

summarize my observations. These are extremely het- 
erogeneous, and both good and bad; but I have never 
been able to discover a universal principle or an infalli- 
ble method of descent. In consequence of all this I have 
not yet summoned the resolution to make my actual 
descent, and am thrown into despair at the necessity 
of doing it soon. I almost screw myself to the point of 
deciding to emigrate to distant parts and take up my 
old comfortless life again, which had no security what- 
ever, but was one indiscriminate succession of perils, 
yet in consequence prevented one from perceiving and 
fearing particular perils, as I am constantly reminded 
by comparing my secure burrow with ordinary life. 
Certainly such a decision would be an arrant piece of 
folly, produced simply by living too long in senseless 
fr-eedom; the burrow is still mine, I have only to take 
a single step and I am safe. And I tear myself free from 
all my doubts and by broad daylight rush to the door, 
quite resolved to raise it now; but I cannot, I rush past 
it and fling myself into a thorn bush, deliberately, as a 
punishment, a punishment for some sin I do not know 
of. Then, at the last moment, I am forced to admit to 
myself that I was right after all, and that it was really 
impossible to go down into the burrow without leav- 
ing the thing I love best, for a little while at least, at 
the disposal of all my enemies, on the ground, in the 
trees, in the air. And the danger is by no means a fanci- 
ful one, but very real. It need not be any particular en- 
emy that is provoked to pursue me, it may very well be 
some chance innocent little creature, some disgusting 
little beast which follows me out of curiosity, and thus, 



THE BURROW 


273 

without knowing it, becomes the leader of all the 
world against me; nor need it be even that, it may be 
— and that would be just as bad, indeed in some re- 
spects worse — it may be some one of my own kind, a 
connoisseur and prizer of burrows, a hermit, a lover of 
peace, but all the same a filthy scoundrel who wishes 
to be housed where he has not built. If he were actually 
to arrive now, if in his obscene lust he were to discover 
the entrance and set about working at it, lifting the 
moss; if he were actually to succeed, if he were actually 
to wriggle his way in in my stead, until only his hind- 
quarters still showed; if all this were actually to hap- 
pen, so that at last, casting all prudence to the winds, 
I might in my blind rage leap on him, maul him, tear 
the flesh from his bones, destroy him, drink his blood 
and fling his corpse among the rest of my spoil, but 
above all — that is the main thing — ^were at last back in 
my burrow once more, I would have it in my heart 
to greet the labyrinth itself with rapture; but first 1 
would draw the moss covering over me, and I would 
want to rest, it seems to me, for all the remainder of 
my life. But nobody comes and I am left to my own 
resources. Perpetually obsessed by the sheer difficulty 
of the attempt, I lose much of my timidity, I no longer 
attempt even to appear to avoid the entrance, but make 
a hobby of prowling round it; by now it is almost as if 
I were the enemy spying out a suitable opportunity for 
successfully breaking in. If I only had someone I could 
trust to keep watch at my post of observation; then of 
course I could descend in perfect peace of mind. 1 
would make an agreement with this trusty confederate 



THE BURROW 


274 

of mine that he would keep a careful note of the state 
of things during my descent and for quite a long time 
afterwards, and if he saw any sign of danger knock on 
the moss covering, and if he saw nothing do nothing. 
With that a clean sweep would be made of all my fears, 
no residue would be left, or at most my confidant. For 
would he not demand some counter-service from me; 
would he not at last want to see the burrow? That in 
itself, to let any one freely into my burrow, would be 
exquisitely painful to me. I built it for myself, not for 
visitors, and I think I would refuse to admit him; not 
even though he alone made it possible for me to get 
into the burrow would I let him in. But I simply could 
not admit him, for either I must let him go in first by 
himself, which is simply unimaginable, or we must both 
descend at the same time, in which case the advantage 
I am supposed to derive from him, that of being kept 
watch over, would be lost. And what trust can I really 
put in him? Can I trust one whom I have had under 
my eyes just as fully when I can't see him, and the moss 
covering separates us? It is comparatively easy to trust 
anyone if you are supervising him or at least can su- 
pervise him; perhaps it is possible even to trust some 
one at a distance; but completely to trust some one 
outside the burrow when you are inside the burrow, 
that is, in a different world, that, it seems to me, is im- 
possible. But such considerations are not in the least 
necessary; the mere reflection is enough that during or 
after my descent one of the countless accidents of exist- 
ence might prevent my confidant from fulfilling his 
duty, and what incalculable results might not the small- 



THE BURROW 275 

est accident of that kind have for me? No, if one takes 
it by and large, I have no right to complain that I am 
alone and have nobody that I can trust. I certainly lose 
nothing by that and probably spare myself trouble. I 
can only trust myself and my burrow. I should have 
thought of that before and taken measures to meet the 
difficulty that worries me so much now. When I began 
the burrow it would at least have been partly possible. 
I should have so constructed the first passage that it 
had two entrances at a moderate distance from each 
other, so that after descending through the one em 
trance with that slowness which is unavoidable, I might 
rush at once through the passage to the second entrance, 
slightly raise the moss covering, which would be so ar- 
ranged as to make that easy, and from there keep watch 
on the position for several days and nights. That would 
have been the only right way of doing it. True, the two 
entrances would double the risk, but that consideration 
need not delay me, for one of the entrances, serving 
merely as a post of observation, could be quite narrow. 
And with that I lose myself in a maze of technical spec- 
ulations, I begin once more to dream my dream of a 
completely perfect burrow, and that somewhat calms 
me; with closed eyes I behold with delight perfect or 
almost perfect structural devices for enabling me to 
slip out and in unobserved. While I lie there thinking 
such things I admire these devices very greatly, but only 
as technical achievements, not as real advantages, for 
this freedom to slip out and in at will, what does it 
amount to? It is the mark of a restless nature, of inner 
uncertainty, disreputable desires, evil propensities that 



27^ THE BURROW 

seem still worse when one thinks of the burrow, which 
is there at one’s hand and can flood one with peace if 
one only remains quite open and receptive to it. For 
the present, however, I am outside it seeking some pos- 
sibility of returning, and for that the necessary techni- 
cal devices would be very desirable. But perhaps not 
so very desirable after all. Is it not a very grave injus- 
tice to the burrow to regard it in moments of nervous 
panic as a mere hole into which one can creep and be 
safe? Certainly it is a hole among other things, and a 
safe one, or should be, and when I picture myself in the 
midst of danger, then I insist with clenched teeth and 
all my will that the burrow should be nothing but a 
hole set apart to save me, and that it should fulfil that 
clearly defined function with the greatest possible efifi- 
ciency, and I am ready to absolve it from every other 
duty. Now the truth of the matter — and one has no eye 
for that in times of great peril, and only by a great ef- 
fort even in times when danger is threatening — is that 
in reality the burrow does provide a considerable de- 
gree of security, but by no means enough, for is one 
ever free from anxieties inside it? These anxieties are 
different from ordinary ones, prouder, richer in con- 
tent, often long repressed, but in their destructive ef- 
fects they are perhaps much the same as the anxieties 
that existence in the outer world gives rise to. Had I 
constructed the burrow exclusively to assure my safety 
I would not have been disappointed, it is true; never- 
theless the relation between the enormous labor in- 
volved and the actual security it would provide, at least 
in so fax as I could feel it and profit by it, would not 



THE BURROW 


277 

have been in my favor. It is extremely painful to have 
to admit such things to oneself, but one is forced to do 
it, confronted by that entrance over there which now 
literally locks and bars itself against me, the builder 
and possessor. Yet the burrow is not a mere hole for 
taking refuge in. When I stand in the Castle Keep sur- 
rounded by my piled-up stores, surveying the ten pas- 
sages which begin there, raised and sunken passages, 
vertical and rounded passages, wide and narrow pas- 
sages, as the general plan dictates, and all alike stUl 
and empty, ready by their various routes to conduct me 
to all the other rooms, which are also still and empty — 
then all thought of mere safety is far from my mind, 
then I know that here is my castle, which I have wrested 
from the refractory soil with tooth and claw, with 
pounding and hammering blows, my castle which can 
never belong to anyone else, and is so essentially mine 
that I can calmly accept in it even my enemy’s mortal 
stroke at the final hour, for my blood will ebb away 
here in my own soil and not be lost. And what but that 
is the meaning of the blissful hours which I pass, now 
peacefully slumbering, now happily keeping watch, in 
these passages, these passages which suit me so well, 
where one can stretch oneself out in comfort, roll about 
in childish delight, lie and dream, or sink into blissful 
sleep. And the smaller rooms, each familiar to me, so 
familiar that in spite of their complete similarity I can 
clearly distinguish one from the other with my eyes 
shut by the mere feel of the wall: they enclose me more 
peacefully and warmly than a bird is enclosed in ite 
nest. And all, all still and empty. 



THE BURROW 


278 

But if that is the case, why do I hang back? Why do I 
dread the thought of the intruding enemy more than 
the possibility of never seeing my burrow again? Well, 
the latter alternative is fortunately an impossibility; 
there is no need for me even to take thought to know 
what the burrow means to me; I and the burrow belong 
so indissolubly together that in spite of all my fears I 
could make myself quite comfortable out here, and not 
even need to overcome my repugnance and open the 
door; I could be quite content to wait here passively, 
for nothing can part us for long, and somehow or other 
I shall quite certainly find myself in my burrow again. 
But on the other hand how much time may pass before 
then, and how many things may happen in that time, 
up here no less than down there? And it lies with me 
solely to curtail that interval and to do what is neces- 
sary at once. 

And then, too exhausted to be any longer capable of 
thought, my head hanging, my legs trembling with fa- 
Hgue, half-asleep, feeling my way rather than walking, 
I approach the entrance, slowly raise the moss covering, 
slowly descend, leaving the door open in my distraction 
for a needlessly long time, and presently remember 
my omission, and get out again to make it good 
* — ^but what need was there to get out for that? All that 
was needed was to draw to the moss covering; right; so 
I creep in again and now at last draw to the moss cov- 
ering. Only in this state, and in this state alone, can I 
achieve my descent. — So at last I lie down beneath the 
moss on the top of my bloodstained spoil and can now 
enjoy my longed-for sleep. Nothing disturbs me, no one 



THE BURROW 


279 

has tracked me down, above the moss everything seems 
to be quiet thus far at least, but even if it all were not 
quiet I question whether I could stop to keep watch 
now; I have changed my place, I have left the upper 
world and am in my burrow, and I feel its effect at 
once. It is a new world, endowing me with new powers, 
and what I felt as fatigue up there is no longer that 
here. I have returned from a journey, dog-tired with 
my wanderings, but the sight of the old house, the 
thought of all the things that are waiting to be done, 
the necessity at least to cast a glance at all the rooms, 
but above all to make my way immediately to the Cas- 
tle Keep; all this transforms my fatigue into ardent 
zeal; it is as though at the moment when I set foot in 
the burrow I had wakened from a long and profound 
sleep. My first task is a very laborious one and requires 
all my attention; I mean getting my spoil through the 
narrow and thin-walled passages of the labyrinth. I 
shove with all my might, and the work gets done too, 
but far too slowly for me; to hasten it I drag part of my 
flesh supply back again and push my way over it and 
through it; now I have only a portion of my spoil be- 
fore, me and it is easier to make progress; but my road 
is so blocked by all this flesh in these narrow passages, 
through which it is not always easy for me to make my 
way when I am alone, that I could quite easily smother 
among my own stores; sometimes I can only rescue my- 
self from their pressure by eating and drinking a clear 
space for myself. But the work of transport is successful, 
I finish it in quite a reasonable time, the labyrinth is 
behind me, I reach an ordinary passage and breathe 



THE BURROW 


280 

freely, push my spoil through a communication passage 
into a main passage expressly designed for the purpose, 
a passage sloping down steeply to the Castle Keep. What 
is left to be done is not really work at all; my w^hole load 
rolls and flows down the passage almost of itself. The 
Castle Keep at last! At last I can dare to rest. Every- 
thing is unchanged, no great mishap seems to have oc- 
curred, the few little defects that I note at a first glance 
can soon be repaired; first, however, I must go my long 
round of all the passages, but that is no hardship, that 
is merely to commune again with friends, as I often did 
in the old days or — I am not so very old yet, but my 
memory of many things is already quite confused — as I 
often did, or as I have often imagined I did. I begin 
with the second passage, but break off in the middle 
and turn into the third passage and let it take me back 
again to the Castle Keep, and now of course I have to 
begin at the second passage once more, and so I play 
with my task and lengthen it out and smile to myself 
and congratulate myself and become quite dazed with 
all the work in front of me, but never think of turning 
aside from it. It is for your sake, ye passages and rooms, 
and you, Castle Keep, above all, that I have come back, 
counting my own life as nothing in the balance, after 
stupidly trembling for it for so long, and postponing 
my return to you. What do I care for danger now that 
I am with you? You belong to me, I to you, we are 
united; what can harm us? What if my foes should be 
assembling even now up above there and their muz- 
zles be preparing to break through the moss? And with 
its silence and emptiness the burrow answers me, con- 



THE BURROW 


sSj 

firming my words. — But now a feeling of lassitude oven 
comes me and in some favorite room I curl myself up 
tentatively, I have not yet surveyed everything by a long 
way, though still resolved to examine everything to the 
very end, I have no intention of sleeping here, I have 
merely yielded to the temptation of making myself 
comfortable and pretending I want to sleep, I merely 
wish to find out if this is as good a place for sleeping in 
as it used to be. It is, but it is a better place for sleep 
than for wakening, and I remain lying where I am in 
deep slumber. 

I must have slept for a long time. I was only wakened 
when I had reached the last light sleep which dissolves 
of itself, and it must have been very light, for it was an 
almost inaudible whistling noise that wakened me. I 
recognized what it was immediately; the smaller fry, 
whom I had allowed far too much latitude, had bur- 
rowed a new channel somewhere during my absence, 
this channel must have chanced to intersect an older 
one, the air was caught there, and that produced the 
whistling noise. What an indefatigably busy lot these 
smaller fry are, and what a nuisance their diligence can 
be! First I shall have to listen at the walls of my pas^ 
sages and locate the place of disturbance by experi- 
mental excavations, and only then will I be able to get 
rid of the noise. However, this new channel may be 
quite welcome as a further means of ventilation, if it 
can be fitted into the plan of the burrow. But after this 
I shall keep a much sharper eye on the small fry than I 
used to; I shall spare none of them. 

As I have a good deal of experience in investigations 



sSs 


THE BURROW 


of this kind the work probably will not take me long 
and I can start upon it at once; there are other jobs 
awaiting me, it is true, but this is the most urgent. I 
must have silence in my passages. This noise, however, 
is a comparatively innocent one; I did not hear it at all 
when I first arrived, although it must certainly have 
been there; I must first feel quite at home before I could 
hear it; it is, so to speak, audible only to the ear of the 
householder. And it is not even constant, as such noises 
usually are; there are long pauses, obviously caused by 
stoppages of the current of air. I start on my investiga- 
tions, but I can’t find the right place to begin at, and 
though I cut a few trenches I do it at random; naturally 
that has no effect, and the hard work of digging and the 
still harder work of filling the trenches up again and 
beating the earth firm is so much labor lost. I don’t 
seem to be getting any nearer to the place where the 
noise is, it goes on always on the same thin note, with 
regular pauses, now a sort of whistling, but again like 
a kind of piping. Now I could leave it to itself for the 
time being; it is very disturbing, certainly, but there 
can hardly be any doubt that its origin is what I took it 
to be at first; so it can scarcely become louder, on the 
contrary such noises may quite well — though until now 
I have never had to wait so long for that to happen — 
may quite well vanish of themselves in the course of 
time through the continued labors of these little bur- 
rowers; and apart from that often chance itself puts one 
on the track of the disturbance, where systematic in- 
vestigation has failed for a long time. In such ways I 
comfort myself, and resolve simply to continue my tour 



THE BURROW 


283 

of the passages, and visit the rooms, many of which I 
have not even seen yet since my return, and enjoy 
myself contemplating the Castle Keep now and then 
between times; but my anxiety will not let me, and I 
must go on wdth my search. These little creatures take 
up much, far too much, time that could be better em- 
ployed. In such cases as the present it is usually the 
technical problem that attracts me; for example, from 
the noise, which my ear can distinguish in all its finest 
shades, so that it has a perfectly clear outline to me, 
I deduce its cause, and now I am on fire to discover 
whether my conclusion is valid. And with good reason, 
for as long as that is not established I cannot feel safe, 
even if it were merely a matter of discovering where a 
grain of sand that had fallen from one of the walls had 
rolled to. And even a noise such as this is by no means a 
trifling matter, regarded from that angle. But whether 
trifling or important, I can find nothing, no matter how 
hard I search, or it may be that I find too much. This 
had to happen just in my favorite room, I think to 
myself, and I walk a fair good distance away from it, 
almost half-way along the passage leading to the next 
room; but I do this merely as a joke, pretending to my- 
self that my favorite room is not alone to blame, but 
that there are disturbances elsewhere as well, and with 
a smile on my face I begin to listen; but soon I stop 
smiling, for, right enough, the same whistling meets me 
here too. It is really nothing to worry about; sometimes 
1 think that nobody but myself would hear it; it is true, 
I hear it now more and more distinctly, for my ear has 
grown keener through practice; though in reality it is 



THE BURROW 


.284 

exactly the same noise wherever I may hear it, as I have 
convinced myself by comparing my impressions. Nor 
is it growing louder; I recognize this when I listen in 
the middle of the passage instead of pressing my ear 
against the wall. Then it is only by straining my ears, 
indeed by lowering my head as rvell, that I can more 
guess at than hear the merest trace of a noise now and 
then. But it is this very uniformity of the noise every- 
where that disturbs me most, for it cannot be made to 
agree with my original assumption. Had I rightly di- 
vined the cause of the noise, then it must have issued 
with greatest force from some given place, which it 
would be my task to discover, and after that have grown 
fainter and fainter. But if my hypothesis does not meet 
the case, what can the explanation be? There still re- 
mains the possibility that there are two noises, that up 
to now I have been listening at a good distance from 
the two centers, and that while its noise increases, when 
I draw near to one of them, the total result remains ap- 
proximately the same for the ear in consequence of the 
lessening volume of sound from the other center. Al- 
ready I have almost fancied sometimes, when I have 
listened carefully, that I could distinguish, if very in- 
distinctly, differences of tone which support this new 
assumption. In any case I must extend my sphere of 
investigation far further than I have done. Accordingly 
I descend the passage to the Castle Keep and begin to 
listen there. Strange, the same noise there too. Now it 
is a noise produced by the burrowing of some species 
of small fry who have infamously exploited my absence; 
in any case they have no intention of doing me harm, 



THE BURROW 


285 

they are simply busied with their own work, and so long 
as no obstacle comes in their way they will keep on in 
the direction they have taken: I know all this, yet that 
they should have dared to approach the very Castle 
Keep itself is incomprehensible to me and fills me with 
agitation, and confuses the faculties which I need so 
urgently for the work before me. Here I have no wish 
to discover whether it is the unusual depth at which the 
Castle Keep lies, or its great extent and correspond- 
ingly powerful air suction, calculated to scare burrow- 
ing creatures atvay, or the mere fact that it is the Castle 
Keep, that by some channel or other has penetrated to 
their dull minds. In any case I have never noticed any 
sign of burrowing in the walls of the Castle Keep until 
now. Crotv'ds of little beasts have come here, it is true, 
attracted by the powerful smells; here I have had a con- 
stant hunting-ground, but my quarry has always bur- 
rowed a tvay through in the upper passages, and come 
running down here, somewhat fearfully, but unable to 
withstand such a temptation. But now, it seems, they 
are burrowing in all the passages. If I had only carried 
out the best of the grand plans I thought out in my 
youth and early manhood, or rather, if I had only had 
the strength to carry them out, for there would have 
been no lack of will. One of these favorite plans of 
mine was to isolate the Castle Keep from its surround- 
ings, that is to say, to restrict the thickness of its walls 
to about my own height, and leave a free space of about 
the same width all round the Castle Keep, except for a 
narrow foundation, which unfortunately would have to 
be left to bear up tb'> whole. I had always pictured this 



286 


THE BURROW 


free space, and not without reason, as the loveliest im- 
aginable haunt. What a joy to lie pressed against the 
rounded outer wall, pull oneself up, let oneself slide 
down again, miss one’s footing and find oneself on firm 
earth, and play all those games literally upon the Castle 
Keep and not inside it; to avoid the Castle Keep, to rest 
one’s eyes from it whenever one wanted, to postpone 
the joy of seeing it until later and yet not have to 
do without it, but literally hold it safe between one’s 
claws, a thing that is impossible if you have only an 
ordinary open entrance to it; but above all to be able to 
stand guard over it, and in that way to be so completely 
compensated for renouncing the actual sight of it that, 
if one had to choose between staying all one’s life in the 
Castle Keep or in the free space outside it, one would 
choose the latter, content to wander up and down there 
all one’s days and keep guard over the Castle Keep. 
Then there would be no noises in the walls, no insolent 
burrowing up to the very Keep itself; then peace would 
be assured there and I would be its guardian; then I 
would not have to listen with loathing to the burrow- 
ing of the small fry, but with delight to something that 
I cannot hear now at all: the murmurous silence of the 
Castle Keep. 

But that beautiful dream is past and I must set 
to work, almost glad that now my work has a direct 
connection with the Castle Keep, for that wings it. 
Certainly, as I can see more and more clearly, I need 
all my energies for this task, which at first seemed quite 
a trifling one. I listen now at the walls of the Castle 
Keep, and wherever I listen, high or low, at the roof or 



THE BURROW 


287 

the floor, at the entrance or in the corners, everywhere, 
everywhere, I hear the same noise. And how much time, 
how much care must be wasted in listening to that noise, 
with its regular pauses. One can, if one wishes, find a 
tiny deceitful comfort in the fact that here in the Castle 
Keep, because of its vastness, one hears nothing at all, 
as distinguished from the passages, when one stands 
back from the walls. Simply as a rest and a means to re- 
gain my composure I often make this experiment, lis- 
ten intently and am overjoyed when I hear nothing. 
But the question still remains, what can have hap- 
pened? Confronted with this phenomenon my original 
explanation completely falls to the ground. But I must 
also reject other explanations which present themselves 
to me. One could assume, for instance, that the noise I 
hear is simply that of the small fry themselves at their 
work. But all my experience contradicts this; I cannot 
suddenly begin to hear now a thing that I have never 
heard before though it was always there. My sensitive- 
ness to disturbances in the burrow has perhaps become 
greater with the years, yet my hearing has by no means 
grown keener. It is of the very nature of small fry not 
to be heard. Would I have tolerated them otherwise? 
Even at the risk of starvation I would have extermi- 
nated them. But perhaps — this idea now insinuates it- 
self — I am concerned here with some animal unknown 
to me. That is possible. True, I have observed the life 
down here long and carefully enough, but the world is 
full of diversity and is never wanting in painful sur- 
prises. Yet it cannot be a single animal, it must be a 
whole swarm that has suddenly fallen upon my do- 



288 


THE BURROW 


main, a huge swarm o£ little creatures, which as they 
are audible, must certainly be bigger than the small 
fry, but yet cannot be very much bigger, for the sound 
of their labors is itself very faint. It may be, then, a 
swarm of unknown creatures on their wanderings, who 
happen to be passing by my way, who disturb me, but 
will presently cease to do so. So I could really wait for 
them to pass, and need not put myself to the trouble of 
work that will be needless in the end. Yet if these crea- 
tures are strangers, why is it that I never see any of 
them? I have already dug a host of trenches, hoping to 
catch one of them, but I can find not a single one. Then 
it occurs to me that they may be quite tiny creatures, 
far tinier than any I am acquainted with, and that it is 
only the noise they make that is greater. Accordingly I 
investigate the soil I have dug up, I cast the lumps into 
the air so that they break into quite small particles, but 
the noise-makers are not among them. Slowly I come to 
realize that by digging such small fortuitous trenches I 
achieve nothing; in doing that I merely disfigure the 
walls of my burrow, scratching hastily here and there 
without taking time to fill up the holes again; at many 
places already there are heaps of earth which block my 
way and my view. Still, that is only a secondary worry; 
for now I can neither wander about my house, nor re- 
view it, nor rest; often already I have fallen asleep at 
my work in some hole or other, with one paw clutching 
the soil above me, from which in a semi-stupor I have 
been trying to tear a lump. I intend now to alter my 
methods. I shall dig a wide and carefully constructed 
trench in the direction of the noise and not cease from 



THE BURROW 


289 

digging until, independent of all theories, I find the 
real cause of the noise. Then I shall eradicate it, if that 
is within my power, and if it is not, at least I shall know 
the truth. That truth will bring me either peace or 
despair, but whether the one or the other, it will be 
beyond doubt or question. This decision strengthens 
me. All that I have done till now seems to me far too 
hasty; in the excitement of my return, while I had not 
yet shaken myself free from the cares of the upper 
world, and was not yet completely penetrated by the 
peace of the burrow, but rather hypersensitive at hav- 
ing had to renounce it for such a long time, I was 
thrown into complete confusion of mind by an unfa-^ 
miliar noise. And what was it? A faint whistling, audi- 
ble only at long intervals, a mere nothing to which I 
don’t say that one could actually get used, for no one 
could get used to it, but which one could, without ac- 
tually doing anything about it at once, observe for a 
while; that is, listen every two hours, let us say, and 
patiently register the results, instead of, as I had done, 
keeping one’s ear fixed to the wall and at every hint of 
noise tearing out a lump of earth, not really hoping to 
find anything, but simply so as to do something to give 
expression to one’s inward agitation. All that will be 
changed now, I hope. And then, with furious shut eyes, 
I have to admit to myself that I hope nothing of the 
kind, for I am still trembling with agitation just as I 
was hours ago, and if my reason did not restrain me I 
would probably like nothing better than to start stub- 
bornly and defiantly digging, simply for the sake of 
digging, at some place or other, whether I heard any-^ 



THE BURROW 


290 

thing there or not; almost like the small fry, who bur- 
row either without any object at all or simply because 
they eat the soil. My new and reasonable plan both 
tempts me and leaves me cold. There is nothing in it to 
object to, I at least know of no objection; it is bound, so 
far as I can see, to achieve my aim. And yet at bottom I 
do not believe in it; I believe in it so little that I do not 
even fear the terrors which its success may well bring, 
I do not believe even in a dreadful denouement; in- 
deed it seems to me that I have been thinking ever since 
the first appearance of the noise of such a methodical 
trench, and have not begun upon it until now simply 
because I put no trust in it. In spite of that I shall of 
course start on the trench; I have no other alternative; 
but I shall not start at once, but postpone the task for a 
little while. If reason is to be reinstated on the throne 
again, it must be completely reinstated; I shall not rush 
blindly into my task. In any case I shall first repair the 
damage that I have done to the burrow with my wild 
digging; that will take a good long time, but it is neces- 
sary; if the new trench is really to reach its goal it will 
probably be long, and if it should lead to nothing at all 
it will be endless; in any case this task means a longish 
absence from the burrow, though an absence by no 
means so painful as an absence in the upper world, for 
I can interrupt my work whenever I like and pay a visit 
to my house; and even if I should not do that the air of 
the Castle Keep will be wafted to me and surround me 
while I work; nevertheless it means leaving the burrow 
and surrendering myself to an uncertain fate, and con- 
sequently I want to leave the burrow in good order be- 



THE BURROW 


291 

hind me; it shall not be said that I, who am fighting for 
its peace, have myself destroyed that peace without re- 
instating it at once. So I begin by shovelling the soil 
back into the holes from which it was taken, a kind of 
work I am familiar with, that I have done countless 
times almost without regarding it as work, and at 
which, particularly as regards the final pressing and 
smoothing down — and this is no empty boast, but the 
simple truth — I am unbeatable. But this time every- 
thing seems difficult, I am too distracted, every now and 
then, in the middle of my work, I press my ear to the 
wall and listen, and without taking any notice let the 
soil that I have just lifted trickle back into the pas- 
sage again. The final embellishments, which demand a 
stricter attention, I can hardly achieve at all. Hideous 
protuberances, disturbing cracks remain, not to speak 
of the fact that the old buoyancy simply cannot be re- 
stored again to a wall patched up in such a way. I try 
to comfort myself with the reflection that my present 
work is only temporary. When I return after peace has 
been restored I shall repair everything properly: work 
will be mere play to me then. Oh, yes, work is mere play 
in fairy tales, and this comfort of mine belongs to the 
realm of fairy tales too. It would be far better to do the 
work thoroughly now, at once, far more reasonable than 
perpetually to interrupt it and wander off through the 
passages to discover new sources of noise, which is easy 
enough, all that is needed being to stop at any point one 
likes and listen. And that is not the end of my use- 
less discoveries. Sometimes I fancy that the noise has 
stopped, for it makes long pauses; sometimes such a 



THE BURROW 


292 

faint whistling escapes one, one’s own blood is pound- 
ing all too loudly in one’s ears; then two pauses come 
one after another, and for a while one thinks that the 
whistling has stopped forever. I listen no longer, I 
jump up, all life is transfigured; it is as if the fountains 
from which floxvs the silence of the burrow were un- 
sealed. I refrain from verifying my discovery at once, I 
want first to find some one to whom in all good faith I 
can confide it, so I rush to the Castle Keep, I remember, 
for I and everything in me has awakened to new life, 
that I have eaten nothing for a long time, I snatch some- 
thing or other from among my store of food half buried 
under debris and hurriedly begin to swallow it while I 
hurry back to the place where I made my incredible 
liscovery, I only want to assure myself about it inci- 
dentally, perfunctorily, while I am eating; I listen, but 
the most perfunctory listening shows at once that I was 
shamefully deceived: away there in the distance the 
whistling still remains unshaken. And I spit out my 
food, and would like to trample it underfoot, and go 
back to my task, not caring which I take up; any place 
where it seems to be needed, and there are enough 
places like that, I mechanically start on something or 
other, just as if the overseer had appeared and I must 
make a pretense of working for his benefit. But hardly 
have I well begun in this fashion when it may happen 
that I make a new discovery. The noise seems to have 
become louder, not much louder, of course — here it is 
always a matter of the subtlest shades — but all the same 
sufficiently louder for the ear to recognize it clearly. 
And his growing-louder is like a coming-nearer; still 



THE BURROW 


293 

more distinctly than you hear the increasing loudness 
of the noise, you can literally see the step that brings it 
closer to you. You leap back from the wall, you try to 
grasp at once all the possible consequences that this dis^ 
covery will bring with it. You feel as if you had never 
really organized the burrow for defense against attack; 
you had intended to do so, but despite all your expe- 
rience of life the danger of an attack, and consequently 
the need to organize the place for defense, seemed re- 
mote — or rather not remote (how could it possibly be!) 
— but infinitely less important than the need to put it in 
a state where one could live peacefully; and so that con- 
sideration was given priority in everything relating to 
the burrow. Many things in this direction might have 
been done without affecting the plan of the whole; 
most incomprehensibly they have been neglected. I 
have had a great deal of luck all those years, luck has 
spoilt me; I have had anxieties, but anxiety leads to 
nothing when you have luck to back you. 

The thing to do, really to do now, would be to go 
carefully over the burrow and consider every possible 
means of defending it, work out a plan of defense and a 
corresponding plan of construction, and then start on 
the work at once with the vigor of youth. That is the 
work that would really be needed, for which, I need not 
say, it is now far too late in the day; yet that is what 
would really be needed, and not the digging of a grand 
experimental trench, whose only real result would be 
to deliver me hand and foot to the search for danger, 
out of the foolish fear that it will not arrive quickly 
enough of itself. Suddenly I cannot comprehend my 



THE BURROW 


294 

former plan. I can find no slightest trace of reason in 
what had seemed so reasonable; once more I lay aside 
my work and even my listening; I have no wish to dis- 
cover any further signs that the noise is growing louder; 
I have had enough of discoveries; I let everything slide; 
I would be quite content if I could only still the conflict 
going on within me. Once more I let my passages lead 
me where they will, I come to more and more remote 
ones that I have not yet seen since my return, and that 
are quite unsullied by my scratching paws, and whose 
silence rises up to meet me and sinks into me. I do not 
surrender to it, I hurry on, I do not know what I want, 
probably simply to put off the hour. I stray so far that I 
find myself at the labyrinth; the idea of listening be- 
neath the moss covering tempts me; such distant things, 
distant for the moment, chain my interest. I push my 
way up and listen. Deep stillness; how lovely it is here, 
outside there nobody troubles about my burrow, every- 
body has his own affairs, which have no connection with 
me; how have I managed to achieve this state of things 
with all my calculations? Here under the moss covering is 
perhaps the only place in my burrow now where I can lis- 
ten for hours and hear nothing. A complete reversal of 
things in the burrow; what was once the place of danger 
has become a place of tranquillity, while the Castle 
Keep has been plunged into the mel^e of the world and 
all its perils. Still worse, even here there is no peace in 
reality, here nothing has changed; silent or vociferous, 
danger lies in ambush as before above the moss, but I 
have grown insensitive to it, my mind is far too much 
taken up with the whistling in my walls. Is my mind 



THE BURROW 


295 

really taken up with it? It grows louder, it comes 
nearer, but I wriggle my way through the labyrinth and 
make a couch for myself up here under the moss; it is 
almost as if I were already leaving the house to the whis- 
tler, content if I can only have a little peace up here. 
To the whistler? Have I come, then, to a new conclusion 
concerning the cause of the noise? But surely the noise 
is caused by the channels bored by the small fry? Is not 
that my considered opinion? It seems to me that I have 
not retreated from it thus far. And if the noise is not 
caused directly by these channels, it is indirectly. And 
even if it should have no connection with them what^ 
ever, one is not at liberty to make a priori assumptions, 
but must w^ait until one finds the cause, or it reveals it- 
self. One could play with hypotheses, of course, even at 
this stage; for instance it is possible that there has been 
a water burst at some distance away, and that what 
seems a piping or whistling to me is in reality a gur- 
gling. But apart from the fact that I have no experience 
in that sphere — the groundwater that I found at the 
start I drained away at once, and in this sandy soil it 
has never returned — apart from this fact the noise is 
undeniably a whistling and simply not to be translated 
into a gurgling. But what avail all exhortations to be 
calm; my imagination will not rest, and I have actually 
come to believe — it is useless to deny it to myself — that 
the whistling is made by some beast, and moreover not 
by a great many small ones, but by a single great one. 
Many signs contradict this. The noise can be heard 
everywhere and always at the same strength, and more- 
over uniformly, both by day and night. At first, there- 



THE BURROW 


296 

fore, one cannot but incline to the hypothesis of a great 
number of little animals; but as I must have found some 
of them during my digging and I have found nothing, it 
only remains for me to assume the existence of a great 
beast, especially as the things that seem to contradict 
the hypothesis are merely things which make the beast, 
not so much impossible, as merely dangerous beyond 
all ones powers of conception. For that reason alone 
have I stuck out against this hypothesis. I shall cease 
from this self-deception. For a long time already I have 
played with the, idea that the beast can be heard at such 
a great distance because it works so furiously; it burrows 
as fast through the ground as another animal can walk 
on the open road; the ground still trembles at its bur- 
rowing when it has ceased; this reverberation and the 
noise of the boring itself unite into one sound at such a 
great distance, and I, as I hear only the last dying ebb of 
that sound, hear it always at the same uniform strength. 
It follows from this also that the beast is not making for 
me, seeing that the noise never changes; more likely 
it has a plan in view whose purpose I cannot decipher; 
I merely assume that the beast — ^and I make no claim 
whatever that it knows of my existence — is encircling 
me; it has probably made several circles round my 
burrow already since I began to observe it. The na- 
ture of the noise, the piping or whistling, gives me much 
food for thought. When I scratch and scrape in the soil 
in my own fashion the sound is quite differei^t. I can 
explain the whistling only in this way: that the beast*s 
chief means of burrowing is not its claws, which it prob- 
ably employs merely as a secondary resource, but its 



THE BURROW 


^91 

snout or its muzzle, which, of course, apart from its 
enormous strength, must also be fairly shaip at the 
point. It probably bores its snout into the earth with 
one mighty push and tears out a great lump; while it is 
doing that I hear nothing; that is the pause; but then it 
draws in the air for a new push. This indrawal of its 
breath, which must be an earth-shaking noise, not only 
because of the beast’s strength, but of its haste, its furi- 
ous lust for work as well: this noise I hear then as a faint 
whistling. But quite incomprehensible remains the 
beast’s capacity to work without stopping; perhaps the 
short pauses provide also the opportunity of snatching 
a moment’s rest; but apparently the beast has never yet 
allowed itself a really long rest, day and night it goes 
on burrowing, always ^vith the same freshness and vig- 
or, always thinking of its object, which must be 
achieved with the utmost expedition, and which it has 
the ability to achieve with ease. Now I could not have 
foreseen such an opponent. But apart altogether from 
the beast’s peculiar characteristics, what is happening 
now is only something which I should really have 
feared all the time, something against which I should 
have been constantly prepared; the fact that someone 
would come. By what chance can everything have flowed 
on so quietly and happily for such a long time? Who can 
have diverted my enemies from their path, and forced 
them to make a wide detour round my property? Why 
have I been spared for so long, only to be delivered to 
such terrors now? Compared with this, what are all the 
petty dangers in brooding over which I have spent my 
life! As owner of the burrow I had hoped to be in a 



THE BURROW 


298 

Stronger position than any enemy who might chance to 
appear. But simply by virtue of being owner of this 
great vulnerable edifice I am obviously defenseless 
against any serious attack. The joy of possessing it has 
spoilt me, the vulnerability of the burrow has made me 
vulnerable; any wound to it hurts me as I myself were 
hit. It is precisely this that I should have foreseen; in- 
stead of thinking only of my own defense — and how 
perfunctorily and vainly I have done even that — I 
should have thought of the defense of the burrow. 
Above all, provision should have been made for cutting 
off sections of the burrow, and as many as possible of 
them, from the endangered sections when they are at- 
tacked; this should have been done by means of impro- 
vised land-slides, calculated to operate at a moment’s 
notice; moreover these should have been so thick, and 
have provided such an effectual barrier, that the at- 
tacker would not even guess that the real burrow only 
began at the other side. More, these land-slides should 
have been so devised that they not only concealed the 
burrow, but also entombed the attacker. Not the slight- 
est attempt have I made to carry out such a plan, noth- 
ing at all has been done in this direction, I have been 
as thoughtless as a child, I have passed my manhood’s 
years in childish games, I have done nothing but play 
even with the thought of danger, I have shirked really 
taking thought for actual danger. And there has been 
no lack of warning. 

Nothing, of course, approaching the present situation 
has happened before; nevertheless there was an inci- 
dent not unlike it when the burrow was only beginning. 



THE BURROW 209 

The main difference between that time and this is sim 
ply that the burrow was only beginning then. ... In 
those days I was literally nothing more than a humble 
apprentice in his first year, the labyrinth was only 
sketched out in rough outline, I had already dug a little 
room, but the proportions and the execution of the walls 
were sadly bungled; in short everything was so tenta- 
tive that it could only be regarded as an experiment, as 
something which, if one lost patience some day, one 
could leave lying as it was without much regret. Then 
one day as I lay on a heap of earth resting from my 
labors — I have rested far too often from my labors 
all my life — suddenly I heard a noise in the distance. 
Being young at the time, I was less frightened than cu- 
rious. I left my work to look after itself and set myself to 
listen; I listened and listened, and had no wish to fly up 
io my moss covering and stretch myself out there so that 
I might not hear. I did listen, at least. I could clearly 
recognize that the noise came from some kind of bur- 
rowing similar to my own; it was somewhat fainter, of 
course, but how much of that might be put down to the 
distance one could not tell. I was intensely interested, 
but otherwise calm and cool. Perhaps I am in some- 
body else’s burrow, I thought to myself, and now the 
owner is boring his way towards me. If that assumption 
had proved to be correct I would have gone away, for I 
have never had any desire for conquest or bloodshed, 
and begun building somewhere else. But after all I was 
still young and still without a burrow, so I could remain 
quite cook Besides, the further course of the noise 
brought no real cause for apprehension, except that it 



THE BURROW 


300 

was not easy to explain, I£ whoever was boring there 
was really making for me, because he had heard me bon 
ing, then if he changed his direction, as now actually 
happened, it could not be told whether he did this be- 
cause my pause for rest had deprived him of any defi- 
nite point to make towards, or because — which was more 
plausible — he had himself changed his plans. But per- 
haps I had been deceived altogether, and he had never 
been actually making in my direction; at any rate the 
noise grew louder for a while as if he were drawing 
nearer, and being young at that time I probably would 
not have been displeased to see the burrower suddenly 
rising from the ground; but nothing of that kind hap- 
pened, at a certain point the sound of boring began to 
weaken, it grew fainter and fainter, as if the burrower 
were gradually diverging from his first route, and sud- 
denly it broke off altogether, as if he had decided now 
to ‘take the diametrically opposite direction and were 
making straight away from me into the distance. For a 
long time I still went on listening for him in the silence, 
before I returned once more to my work. Now that 
warning was definite enough, but I soon forgot it, and 
it scarcely influenced my building plans. 

Between that day and this lie my years of maturity, 
but is it not as if there were no interval at all between 
them? I still take long rests from my labors and listen 
at the wall, and the burrower has changed his intention 
anew, he has turned back, he is returning from his 
journey, thinking he has given me ample time in the 
interval to prepare for his reception. But on my side 
everything is worse prepared for than it was then; the 



THE BURROW 


301 

great burrow stands defenseless, and I am no longer a 
young apprentice, but an old architect and the powers 
I still have fail me when the decisive hour comes; yet 
old as I am it seems to me that I would gladly be still 
older, so old that I should never be able to rise again 
from my resting-place under the moss. For to be honest 
I cannot endure the place, I rise up and rysh, as if I had 
filled myself up there with new anxieties instead of 
peace, down into the house again. — ^\Vhat was the state 
of things the last time I was here? Had the whistling 
grown fainter? No, it had grown louder. I listen at ten 
places chosen at random and definitely note my own 
disappointment; the whistling is just the same as ever, 
nothing has altered. Up there under the moss no change 
touches one, there one is at peace, uplifted above time; 
but here every instant frets and gnaws at the listener. 
I go once more the long road to the Castle Keep, all my 
surroundings seem filled with agitation, seem to be 
looking at me, and then look away again so as not to an- 
noy me, yet cannot refrain the very next moment from 
trying to read the saving solution from my expression. 
I shake my head, I have not yet found any solution. Nor 
do I go to the Castle Keep in pursuance of any plan. I 
pass the spot where I had intended to begin the experi- 
mental trench, I look it over once more, it would have 
been an admirable place to begin at, the trench's course 
would have been in the direction where lay the majority 
of the tiny ventilation holes, which would have greatly 
lightened my labors; perhaps I should not have had to 
dig very far, should not even have had to dig to the 
source of the noise; perhaps if I had listened at the ven- 



THE BURROW 


302 

tilation holes it would have been enough. But no con- 
sideration is potent enough to animate me to this la- 
bor of digging. This trench will bring me certainty, 
you say? I have reached the stage where I no longer wish 
to have certainty. In the Castle Keep I choose a lovely 
piece of flayed red flesh and creep with it into one of 
the heaps of earth; there I shall have silence at least, 
such silence, at any rate, as still can be said to exist here. 
I munch and nibble at the flesh, think of the strange 
beast going its own road in the distance, and then again 
that I should enjoy my store of food as fully as possible, 
while I still have the chance. This last is probably the 
sole plan I have left that I can carry out. For the rest I 
try to unriddle the beast's plans. Is it on its wanderings, 
or is it working on its own burrow? If it is on its wander- 
ings then perhaps an understanding with it might be 
possible. If it should really break through to the bur- 
row I shall give it some of my store and it will go on its 
way again. It will go its way again, a fine story! Lying 
on my heap of earth I can naturally dream of all 
sorts of things, even of an understanding with the 
beast, though I know well enough that no such thing 
can happen, and that at the instant when we see each 
other, more, at the moment when we merely guess at 
each other's presence, we shall both blindly bare our 
claws and teeth, neither of us a second before or after 
ithe other, both of us filled with a new and different 
hunger, even if we should already be gorged to burst- 
ing. And with entire justice, for who, even if he were 
merely on his wanderings, would not change his itiner- 
ary and his plans for the future on catching sight of the 



THE BURROW 


303 

burrow? But perhaps the beast is digging in its own bun 
row, in which case I cannot even dream of an under- 
standing. Even if it should be such a peculiar beast as 
to be able to tolerate a neighbor near its burrow, it 
could not tolerate my burrow, it would not tolerate in 
any case a neighbor who could be clearly heard. Now 
actually the beast seems to be a great distance away; if 
it would only withdraw a little farther the noise too 
would probably disappear; perhaps in that case every- 
thing would be peaceful again as in the old days; all 
this would then become a painful but salutary lesson, 
spurring me on to make the most diverse improvements 
oti the burrow; if I have peace, and danger does not 
immediately threaten me, I am still quite fit for all sorts 
of hard work; perhaps, considering the enormous possi- 
bilities which its powers of work open before it, the 
beast has given up the idea of extending its burrow in 
my direction, and is compensating itself for that in some 
other one. That consummation also cannot, of course, 
be brought about by negotiation, but only by the beast 
itself, or by some compulsion exercised from my side. 
In both cases the decisive factor will be whether the 
beast knows about me, and if so what it knows. The 
more I reflect upon it the more improbable does it seem 
to me that the beast has even heard of me; it is possible, 
though unimaginable, that it can have received news of 
me through some other channel, but it has certainly 
never heard me. So long as I still knew nothing about 
it, it simply cannot have heard me, for at that time I 
kept very quiet, nothing could be more quiet than my 
return to the burrow; afterwards, when I dug the ex- 



THE BURROW 


304 

perimental trenches, perhaps it could have heard me, 
though my style of digging makes very little noise; but 
if it had heard me I must have noticed some sign of it, 
the beast must at least have stopped its work every now 
and then to listen. But all remained unchanged. 



Josephine the Singer, or the Mouse Folk 


Our singer is called Josephine. Anyone who has not 
heard her does not know the power of song. There is 
no one but is carried away by her singing, a tribute all 
the greater as we are not in general a music-loving race. 
Tranquil peace is the music we love best; our life is 
hard, we are no longer able, even on occasions when we 
have tried to shake off the cares of daily life, to rise to 
anything so high and remote from our usual routine as 
music. But we do not much lament that; we do not get 
even so far; a certain practical cunning, which admit- 
tedly we stand greatly in need of, we hold to be our 
greatest distinction, and with a smile born of such cun 
ning we are wont to console ourselves for all shortcom- 
ings, even supposing — only it does not happen — that we 
were to yearn once in a way for the kind of bliss which 
music may provide. Josephine is the sole exception; she 
has a love for music and knows too how to transmit it; 
she is the only one; when she dies, music — ^who knows 
for how long — will vanish from our lives. 

I have often thought about what this music of hers 
really means. For we are quite unmusical; how is it 
that we understand Josephine’s singing or, since Jose 

S05 



306 JOSEPHINE THE SINGER, OR THE MOUSE FOLK 

phine denies that, at least think we can understand it? 
The simplest answer would be that the beauty of her 
singing is so great that even the most insensitive cannot 
be deaf to it, but this answer is not satisfactory. If it 
were really so, her singing would have to give one an 
immediate and lasting feeling of being something out 
of the ordinary, a feeling that from her throat some- 
thing is sounding which we have never heard before 
and which we are not even capable of hearing, some- 
thing that Josephine alone and no one else can enable 
us to hear. But in my opinion that is just what does not 
happen, I do not feel this and have never observed that 
others feel anything of the kind. Among intimates we 
admit freely to one another that Josephine’s singing, as 
singing, is nothing out of the ordinary. 

Is it in fact singing at all? Although we are unmusical 
we have a tradition of singing; in the old days our peo- 
ple did sing; tliis is mentioned in legends and some 
songs have actually survived, which, it is true, no one 
can now sing. Thus we have an inkling of what singing 
is, and Josephine’s art does not really correspond to it. 
So is it singing at all? Is it not perhaps just a piping? 
And piping is something we all know about, it is the real 
artistic accomplishment of our people, or rather no 
mere accomplishment but a characteristic expression of 
our life. We all pipe, but of course no one dreams of 
making out that our piping is an art, we pipe without 
thinking of it, indeed without noticing it, and there are 
even many among us who are quite unaware that pip* 
ing is one of our characteristics. So if it were true that 



JOSEPHINE THE SINGER, OR THE MOUSE FOLK 307 

Josephine does not sing but only pipes and perhaps, as 
it seems to me at least, hardly rises above the level of 
our usual piping — yet, perhaps her strength is not even 
quite equal to our usual piping, whereas an ordinary 
farmhand can keep it up effortlessly all day long, be- 
sides doing his work — if that were all true, then indeed 
Josephine's alleged vocal skill might be disproved, but 
that would merely clear the ground for the real riddle 
which needs solving, the enormous influence she has. 

After all, it is only a kind of piping that she produces. 
If you post yourself quite far away from her and listen, 
or, still better, put your judgment to the test, when- 
ever she happens to be singing along with others, by 
trying to identify her voice, you will undoubtedly dis- 
tinguish nothing but a quite ordinary piping tone, 
which at most differs a little from the others through 
being delicate or weak. Yet if you sit down before her, 
it is not merely a piping; to comprehend her art it is 
necessary not only to hear but to see her. Even if hers 
were only our usual workaday piping, there is first of 
ail this peculiarity to consider, that here is someone 
making a ceremonial performance out of doing the 
usual thing. To crack a nut is truly no feat, so no one 
would ever dare to collect an audience in order to en- 
tertain it with nut-cracking. But if all the same one 
does do that and succeeds in entertaining the public, 
then it cannot be a matter of simple nut-cracking. Or it 
is a matter of nut-cracking, but it turns out that we have 
overlooked the art of cracking nuts because we were too 
skilled in it and that this newcomer to it first shows us 



goS JOSEPHINE THE SIKGER, OR THE MOUSE FOLK 

its real nature, even finding it useful in making his ef- 
fects to be rather less expert in nut-cracking than most 
of us. 

Perhaps it is much the same with Josephine’s sing- 
ing; we admire in her what we do not at all admire in 
ourselves; in this respect, I may say, she is of one mind 
with us. I was once present when someone, as of course 
often happens, drew her attention to the folk piping 
everywhere going on, making only a modest reference 
to it, yet for Josephine that was more than enough. A 
smile so sarcastic and arrogant as she then assumed I 
have never seen; she, who in appearance is delicacy it- 
self, conspicuously so even among our people who are 
prolific in such feminine types, seemed at that moment 
actually vulgar; she was at once aware of it herself, by 
the way, with her extreme sensibility, and controlled 
herself. At any rate she denies any connection between 
her art and ordinary piping. For those who are of the 
contrary opinion she has only contempt and probably 
unacknowledged hatred. This is not simple vanity, for 
the opposition, with which I too am half in sympathy, 
certainly admires her no less than the crowd does, but 
Josephine does not want mere admiration, she wants to 
be admired exactly in the way she prescribes, mere ad- 
miration leaves her cold. And when you take a seat 
before her, you understand her; opposition is possible 
only at a distance, when you sit before her, you know: 
this piping of hers is no piping. 

Since piping is one of our thoughtless habits, one 
might think that people would pipe up in Josephine*s 
audience too; ■ her art makes us feel happy, and when 



JOSEPHINE THE SINGER, OR THE MOUSE FOLK 509 

we are happy we pipe; but her audience never pipes, it 
sits in mouselike stillness; as if we had become partak- 
ers in the peace we long for, from which our own piping 
at the very least holds us back, we make no sound. Is it 
her singing that enchants us or is it not rather the sol- 
emn stillness enclosing her frail little voice? Once it 
happened while Josephine was singing that some silly 
little thing in all innocence began to pipe up too. Now 
it was just the same as what we were heating from Jose- 
phine; in front of us the piping sound that despite all 
rehearsal was still tentative and here in the audience 
the unself-conscious piping of a child; it would have 
been impossible to define the difference; but yet at once 
we hissed and whistled the interrupter down, although 
it would not really have been necessary, for in any case 
she would certainly have crawled away in fear and 
shame, whereas Josephine struck up her most trium- 
phal notes and was quite beyond herself, spreading her 
arms wide and stretching her throat as high as it could 
reach. 

That is what she is like always, every trifle, every 
casual incident, every nuisance, a creaking in the par 
quet, a grinding of teeth, a failure in the lighting incites 
her to heighten the effectiveness of her song; she be- 
lieves anyhow that she is singing to deaf ears; there is 
no lack of enthusiasm and applause, but she has long 
learned not to expect real understanding, as she con- 
ceives it. So all disturbance is very welcome to her,; 
whatever intervenes from outside to hinder the purity 
of her song, to be overcome with a slight effort, even 
with no effort at all, merely by confronting it, can help 



310 JOSEPHINE THE SINGER, OR THE MOUSE FOLK 

to awaken the masses, to teach them not perhaps under- 
standing but awed respect. 

And if small events do her such service, how much 
more do great ones. Our life is very uneasy, every day 
brings surprises, apprehensions, hopes and terrors, so 
that it would be impossible for a single individual to 
bear it all did he not always have by day and night the 
support of his fellows; but even so it often becomes very 
difficult; frequently as many as a thousand shoulders 
are trembling under a burden that was really meant 
only for one pair. Then Josephine holds that her time 
has come. So there she stands, the delicate creature, 
shaken by vibrations especially below the breastbone, 
so that one feels anxious for her, it is as if she has con- 
centrated all her strength on her song, as if from every- 
thing in her that does not directly subserve her singing 
all strength has been withdrawn, almost all power of 
life, as if she were laid bare, abandoned, committed 
merely to the care of good angels, as if while she is so 
wholly withdrawn and living only in her song a cold 
breath blowing upon her might kill her. But just when 
she makes such an appearance, we who are supposed to 
be her opponents are in the habit of saying: ''She can’t 
even pipe; she has to put such a terrible strain on her- 
self to force out not a song — ^we can’t call it song — ^but 
some approximation to our usual customary piping.” 
So it seems to us, but this impression although, as I 
said, inevitable is yet fleeting and transient. We too are 
soon sunk in the feeling of the mass, that, warmly 
pressed body to body, listens with indrawn breath. 

And to gather around her this mass of our people 



JOSEPHINE THE SINGER, OR THE MOUSE FOLK $11 

who are almost always on the run and scurrying hither 
and thither for reasons that are often not very clear, 
Josephine mostly needs to do nothing else than take up 
her stand, head thrown back, mouth half open, eyes 
turned upwards, in the position that indicates her in- 
tention to sing. She can do this where she likes, it need 
not be a place visible a long way ofiE, any secluded cor- 
ner pitched on in a moment’s caprice will serve as well. 
The news that she is going to sing flies round at once 
and soon whole processions are on the way there. Now, 
sometimes, all the same, obstacles intervene, Josephine 
likes best to sing just when things are most upset, many 
worries and dangers force us then to take devious ways, 
with the best will in the world we cannot assemble our- 
selves as quickly as Josephine wants, and on occasion 
she stands there in ceremonial state for quite a time 
without a sufficient audience — then indeed she turns 
furious, then she stamps her feet, swearing in most urn 
maidenly fashion; she actually bites. But even such 
behavior does no harm to her reputation; instead of 
curbing a little her excessive demands, people exert 
themselves to meet them; messengers are sent out to 
summon fresh hearers; she is kept in ignorance of the 
fact that this is being done; on the roads all around sen- 
tries can be seen posted who wave on newcomers and 
urge them to hurry; this goes on until at last a tolerably 
large audience is gathered. 

What drives the people to make such exertions for 
Josephine’s sake? This is no easier to answer than the 
first question about Josephine’s singing, with which it 
is closely connected. One could eliminate that and com* 



^12 JOSEPHINE THE SINGER, OR THE MOUSE FOLK 

bine them both in the second question, if it were possi- 
ble to assert that because of her singing our people are 
unconditionally devoted to Josephine. But this is simply 
not the case; unconditional devotion is hardly known 
among us; ours are people who love slyness beyond 
everything, without any malice, to be sure, and childish 
whispering and chatter, innocent, superficial chatter, to 
be sure, but people of such a kind cannot go in for un- 
conditional devotion, and that Josephine herselt cer- 
tainly feels, that is what she is fighting against with all 
the force of her feeble throat. 

In making such generalized pronouncements, of 
course, one should not go too far, our people are all the 
same devoted to Josephine, only not unconditionally. 
For instance, they would not be capable of laughing at 
Josephine. It can be admitted: in Josephine there is 
much to make one laugh; and laughter for its own sake 
is never far away from us; in spite of all the misery of 
our lives quiet laughter is always, so to speak, at our 
elbows; but we do not laugh at Josephine. Many a time 
I have had the impression that our people interpret 
their relationship to Josephine in this way, that she, 
this frail creature, needing protection and in some way 
remarkable, in her own opinion remarkable for her gift 
of song, is entrusted to their care and they must look 
after her; the reason for this is not clear to anyone, only 
the fact seems to be established. But what is entrusted 
to one's care one does not laugh at; to laugh would be a 
breach of duty; the utmost malice which the most mali- 
cious of us wreak on Josephine is to say now and then: 



JOSEPHINE THE SINGER, OR THE MOUSE FOLK 313 

“The sight of Josephine is enough to make one stop 
laughing.” 

So the people look after Josephine much as a father 
takes into his care a child whose little hand — one cannot 
tell whether in appeal or command — is stretched out to 
him. One might think that our people are not fitted to 
exercise such paternal duties, but in reality they dis- 
charge them, at least in this case, admirably; no single 
individual could do what in this respect the people as a 
whole are capable of doing. To be sure, the difference 
in strength between the people and the individual is 
so enormous that it is enough for the nursling to be 
drawn into the warmth of their nearness and he is suffi- 
ciently protected. To Josephine, certainly, one does not 
dare mention such ideas. “Your protection isn’t worth 
an old song,” she says then. Sure, sure, old song, we 
think. And besides her protest is no real contradiction, 
it is rather a thoroughly childish way of doing, and 
childish gratitude, while a father’s way of doing is to 
pay no attention to it. 

Yet there is something else behind it which is not so 
easy to explain by this relationship between the people 
and Josephine. Josephine, that is to say, thinks just the 
opposite, she believes it is she who protects the people. 
When we are in a bad way politically or economically, 
her singing is supposed to save us, nothing less than 
that, and if it does not drive away the evil, at least gives 
us the strength to bear it. She does not put it in these 
words or in any other, she says very little anyhow, she 
is silent among the chatterers, but it flashes from her 



314 JOSEPHINE THE SINGER, OR THE MOUSE FOLK 

eyes, on her closed lips — few among us can keep their 
lips closed, but she can — it is plainly legible. Whenever 
^v^e get bad ne^vs — and on many days bad news comes 
thick and fast at once, lies and half-truths included — , 
she rises up at once, whereas usually she sits listlessly on 
the ground, she rises up and stretches her neck and tries 
to see over the heads of her flock like a shepherd before 
a thunderstorm. It is certainly a habit of children, in 
their wild, impulsive fashion, to make such claims, but 
Josephine’s are not quite so unfounded as children’s. 
True, she does not save us and she gives us no strength; 
it is easy to stage oneself as a savior of our people, in- 
ured as they are to suffering, not sparing themselves, 
swift in decision, well acquainted with death, timorous 
only to the eye in the atmosphere of reckless daring 
which they constantly breathe, and as prolific besides 
as they are bold — it is easy, I say, to stage oneself after 
the event as the savior of our people, who have always 
somehow managed to save themselves, although at the 
cost of sacrifices which make historians — generally 
speaking we ignore historical research entirely — quite 
horror-struck. And yet it is true that just in emergencies 
we hearken better than at other times to Josephine’s 
voice. The menaces that loom over us make us quieter, 
more humble, more submissive to Josephine’s domina- 
tion; we like to come together, we like to huddle close 
to each other, especially on an occasion set apart from 
the troubles preoccupying us; it is as if we were drink- 
ing in all haste — ^yes, haste is necessary, Josephine too 
often forgets that — from a cup of peace in common be- 
fore the battle. It is not so much a performance of 



JOSEPHINE THE SINGER, OR THE MOUSE FOLK 315 

songs as an assembly of the people, and an assembly 
where except for the small piping voice in front there is 
complete stillness; the hour is much too grave for us to 
waste it in chatter. 

A relationship of this kind, of course, would never 
content Josephine. Despite all the nervous uneasiness 
that fills Josephine because her position has never been 
quite defined, there is still much that she does not see, 
blinded by her self-conceit, and she can be brought 
fairly easily to overlook much more, a swarm of flatter- 
ers is always busy about her to this end, thus really do- 
ing a public service — and yet to be only an incidental, 
unnoticed performer in a corner of an assembly of the 
people, for that, although in itself it would be no small 
thing, she would certainly not make us the sacrifice of 
her singing. 

Nor does she need to, for her art does not go un- 
noticed. Although we are at bottom preoccupied with 
quite other things and it is by no means only for the 
sake of her singing that stillness prevails and many a 
listener does not even look up but buries his face in his 
neighbor's fur, so that Josephine up in front seems to be 
exerting herself to no purpose, there is yet something — 
it cannot be denied — that irresistibly makes its way into 
us from Josephine's piping. This piping, which rises up 
where everyone else is pledged to silence, comes almost 
like a message from the whole people to each individ- 
ual; Josephine's thin piping amidst grave decisions is 
almost like our people's precarious existence amidst 
the tumult of a hostile world. Josephine exerts herself, 
a mere nothing in voice, a mere nothing in execution, 



§16 JOSEPHINE THE SINGER, OR THE MOUSE FOLK 

she asserts herself and gets across to us; it does us good 
to think of that. A really trained singer, if ever such a 
one should be found among us, we could certainly not 
endure at such a time and we should unanimously turn 
away from the senselessness of any such performance. 
May Josephine be spared from perceiving that the mere 
fact of our listening to her is proof that she is no singer. 
An intuition of it she must have, else why does she so 
passionately deny that we do listen, only she keeps on 
singing and piping her intuition away. 

But there are other things she could take comfort 
from: we do really listen to her in a sense, probably 
much as one listens to a trained singer; she gets effects 
which a trained singer would try in vain to achieve 
among us and which are only produced precisely be- 
cause her means are so inadequate. For this, doubtless, 
our way of life is mainly responsible. 

Among our people there is no age of youth, scarcely 
the briefest childhood. Regularly, it is true, demands 
are put forward that the children should be granted a 
special freedom, a special protection, that their right to 
be a little carefree, to have a little senseless giddiness, a 
little play, that this right should be respected and the 
exercise of it encouraged; such demands are put for- 
ward and nearly everyone approves them, there is noth- 
ing one could approve more, but there is also nothing, 
in the reality of our daily life, that is less likely to be 
granted, one approves these demands, one makes at- 
tempts to meet them, but soon all the old ways are back 
again. Our life happens to be such that a child, as soon 
as it can run about a little and a little distinguish one 



JOSEPHINE THE SINGER, OR THE MOUSE FOLK 317 

thing from another, must look after itself just like an 
adult; the areas on which, for economic reasons, we have 
to live in dispersion are too wide, our enemies too nu- 
merous, the dangers lying everywhere in wait for us 
too incalculable — we cannot shelter our children from 
the struggle for existence, if we did so, it would bring 
them to an early grave. These depressing considerations 
are reinforced by another, which is not depressing: the 
fertility of our race. One generation — and each is nu- 
merous — treads on the heels of another, the children 
have no time to be children. Other races may foster 
their children carefully, schools may be erected for their 
little ones, out of these schools the children may come 
pouring daily, the future of the race, yet among them it 
is always the same children that come out day after day 
for a long time. We have no schools, but from our race 
come pouring at the briefest intervals the innumerable 
swarms of our children, merrily lisping or chirping so 
long as they cannot yet pipe, rolling or tumbling along 
by sheer impetus so long as they cannot yet run, clumsily 
carrying everything before them by mass weight so long 
as they cannot yet see, our children! And not the same 
children, as in those schools, no, always new children 
again and again, without end, without a break, hardly 
does a child appear than it is no more a child, while be- 
hind it new childish faces are already crowding so fast 
and so thick that they are indistinguishable, rosy with 
happiness. Truly, however delightful this may be and 
however much others may envy us for it, and rightly, 
we simply cannot give a real childhood to our children 
And that has its consequences. A kind of unexpended^ 



3i8 JOSEPHINE THE SINGER, OR THE MOUSE FOLK. 

ineradicable childishness pervades our people; in direct 
opposition to what is best in us, our infallible practical 
common sense, we often behave with the utmost fool- 
ishness, with exactly the same foolishness as children, 
senselessly, wastefully, grandiosely, irresponsibly, and 
all that often for the sake of some trivial amusement. 
And although our enjoyment of it cannot of course be 
so wholehearted as a child’s enjoyment, something of 
this survives in it without a doubt. From this childish- 
ness of our people Josephine too has profited since the 
beginning. 

Yet our people are not only childish, we are also in a 
sense prematurely old. Childhood and old age come 
upon us not as upon others. We have no youth, we are 
all at once grown-up, and then we stay growm-up too 
long, a certain weariness and hopelessness spreading 
from that leaves a broad trail through our people’s na- 
ture, tough and strong in hope that it is in general. Our 
lack of musical gifts has surely some connection with 
this; we are too old for music, its excitement, its rap- 
ture do not suit our heaviness, wearily we wave it away; 
we content ourselves with piping; a little piping here 
and there, that is enough for us. Who knows, there may 
be talents for music among us; but if there were, the 
character of our people would suppress them before 
they could unfold. Josephine on the other hand can 
pipe as much as she will, or sing or whatever she likes to 
call it, that does not disturb us, that suits us, that we can 
well put up with; any music there may be in it is re- 
duced to the least possible trace; a certain tradition of 



JOSEPHINE THE SINGER, OR THE MOUSE FOLK gig 

music is preserved, yet without making the slightest de- 
mand upon us. 

But our people, being what they are, get still more 
than this from Josephine. At her concerts, especially in 
times of stress, it is only the very young who are inter- 
ested in her singing as singing, they alone gaze in aston- 
ishment as she purses her lips, expels the air between 
her pretty front teeth, swoons in sheer wonderment 
at the sounds she herself is producing and after such a 
lying away swells her performance to new and more 
incredible heights, whereas the real mass of the people 
— this is plain to see — are quite withdrawn into them- 
selves. Here in the brief intervals between their strug- 
gles our people dream, it is as if the limbs of each were 
loosened, as if the harried individual once in a while 
could relax and stretch himself at ease in the great, 
warm bed of the community. And into these dreams 
Josephine’s piping drops note by note; she calls it pearl- 
like, we call it staccato; but at any rate here it is in its 
right place, as nowhere else, finding the moment wait 
for it as music scarcely ever does. Something of our poor 
brief childhood is in it, something of lost happiness that 
can never be found again, but also something of active 
daily life, of its small gaieties, unaccountable and yet 
springing up and not to be obliterated. And indeed this 
is all expressed not in full round tones but softly, in 
whispers, confidentially, sometimes a little hoarsely. 
Of course it is a kind of piping. Why not? Piping is our 
people’s daily speech, only many a one pipes his whole 
life long and does not know it, where here piping is set 



§20 JOSEPHINE THE SINGER, OR THE MOUSE FOLK 

free from the fetters of daily life and it sets us free too 
for a little while. We certainly should not want to do 
without these performances. 

But from that point it is a long, long way to Jose- 
phine's claim that she gives us new strength and so on 
and so forth. For ordinary people, at least, not for her 
train of flatterers. **What other explanation could there 
be" — they say with quite shameless sauciness — "how 
else could you explain the great audiences, especially 
when danger is most imminent, which have even often 
enough hindered proper precautions being taken in 
time to avert danger?" Now, this last statement is unfor- 
tunately true, but can hardly be counted as one of 
Josephine's titles to fame, especially considering that 
when such large gatherings have been unexpectedly 
flushed by the enemy and many of our people left lying 
for dead, Josephine, who was responsible for it all, and 
indeed perhaps attracted the enemy by her piping, has 
always occupied the safest place and was always the 
first to whisk away quietly and speedily under cover of 
her escort. Still, everyone really knows that, and yet 
people keep running to whatever place Josephine de- 
cides on next, at whatever time she rises up to sing. One 
could argue from this that Josephine stands almost be- 
yond the law, that she can do what she pleases, at the 
risk of actually endangering the community, and will 
be forgiven for everything. If this were so, even Jose- 
|>hine's claims would be entirely comprehensible, yes, 
in this freedom to be allowed her, this extraordinary 
gift granted to her and to no one else in direct contra- 
vention of the laws, one could see an admission of the 



JOSEPHINE THE SINGER, OR THE MOUSE FOLK 

fact that the people do not understand Josephine, just 
as she alleges, that they marvel helplessly at her art, feel 
themselves unworthy of it, try to assuage the pity she 
rouses in them by making really desperate sacrifices for 
her and, to the same extent that her art is beyond 
their comprehension, consider her personality and het 
wishes to lie beyond their jurisdiction. Well, that is sim- 
ply not true at all, perhaps as individuals the people 
may surrender too easily to Josephine, but as a whole 
they surrender unconditionally to no one, and not to 
her either. 

For a long time back, perhaps since the very begin- 
ning of her artistic career, Josephine has been fighting 
for exemption from all daily work on account of her 
singing; she should be relieved of all responsibility for 
earning her daily bread and being involved in the gen- 
eral struggle for existence, which — apparently — should 
be transferred on her behalf to the people as a whole. 
A facile enthusiast — and there have been such — ^might 
argue from the mere unusualness of this demand, from 
the spiritual attitude needed to frame such a demand, 
that it has an inner justification. But our people draw 
other conclusions and quietly refuse it. Nor do they 
trouble much about disproving the assumptions on 
which it is based. Josephine argues, for instance, that 
the strain of working is bad for her voice, that the strain 
of woi"king is of course nothing to the strain of singing, 
but it prevents her from being able to rest sufficiently 
after singing and to recuperate for more singing, she 
has to exhaust her strength completely and yet, in these 
circumstances, can never rise to the peak of her abilities. 



}22 JOSEPHINE THE SINGER, OR THE MOUSE FOLK 

The people listen to her arguments and pay no atten- 
tion. Our people, so easily moved, sometimes cannot 
be moved at all. Their refusal is sometimes so decided 
that even Josephine is taken aback, she appears to sub- 
mit, does her proper share of work, sings as best she 
can, but all only for a time, then with renewed strength 
— for this purpose her strength seems inexhaustible — 
she takes up the fight again. 

Now it is clear that what Josephine really wants is not 
what she puts into words. She is honorable, she is not 
ivork-shy, shirking in any case is quite unknown among 
us, if her petition were granted she would certainly live 
the same life as before, her work would not at all get 
in the way of her singing nor would her singing grow 
any better — what she wants is public, unambiguous, per- 
manent recognition of her art, going far beyond any 
precedent so far known. But while almost everything 
else seems within her reach, this eludes her persistently. 
Perhaps she should have taken a different line of attack 
from the beginning, perhaps she herself sees that her 
approach was wrong, but now she cannot draw back, 
retreat would be self-betrayal, now she must stand or 
fall by her petition. 

If she really had enemies, as she avers, they could get 
much amusement from watching this struggle, without 
having to lift a finger. But she has no enemies, and even 
though she is often criticized here and there, no one 
finds this struggle of hers amusing. Just because of the 
fact that the people show themselves here in their 
cold, judicial aspect, which is otherwise rarely seen 
among us. And however one may approve it in this case. 



JOSEPHINE THE SINGER, OR THE MOUSE FOLK 323 

the very idea that such an aspect might be turned upon 
oneself some day prevents amusement from breaking 
in. The important thing, both in the people's refusal 
and in Josephine's petition, is not the action itself, but 
the fact that the people are capable of presenting a 
stony, impenetrable front to one of their own, and that 
it is all the more impenetrable because in other re- 
spects they show an anxious paternal care, and more 
than paternal care, for this very member of the people. 

Suppose that instead of the people one had an indi- 
vidual to deal with: one might imagine that this man 
had been giving in to Josephine all the time while nurs- 
ing a wild desire to put an end to his submissiveness one 
fine day; that he had made superhuman sacrifices for 
Josephine in the firm belief that there was a natural 
limit to his capacity for sacrifice; yes, that he had sacri- 
ficed more than was needful merely to hasten the proc- 
ess, merely to spoil Josephine and encourage her to 
ask for more and more until she did indeed reach the 
limit with this last petition of hers; and that he then cut 
her off with a final refusal which was curt because long 
held in reserve. Now, this is certainly not how the 
matter stands, the people have no need of such guile, be- 
sides, their respect for Josephine is well tried and 
genuine, and Josephine's demands are after all so far- 
reaching that any simple child could have told her what 
the outcome would be; yet it may be that such consid- 
■^rations enter into Josephine's way of taking the matter 
and so add a certain bitterness to the pain of being re- 
fused. 

But whatever her ideas on the subject, she does not 



JOSEPHINE THE. SINGER, OR THE MOUSE FOLK 

let them deter her from pursuing the campaign. Re 
cently she has even intensified her attack; hitherto she 
has used only words as her weapons but now she is be- 
ginning to have recourse to other means, which she 
thinks will prove more efficacious but which we think 
will run her into greater dangers. 

Many believe that Josephine is becoming so insistent 
because she feels herself growing old and her voice fall- 
ing off, and so she thinks it high time to wage the last 
battle for recognition. I do not believe it. Josephine 
would not be Josephine if that were true. For her there 
is no growing old and no falling off in her voice. If she 
makes demands it is not because of outward circum- 
stances but because of an inner logic. She reaches for 
the highest garland not because it is momentarily hang- 
ing a little lower but because it is the highest; if she 
had any say in the matter she would have it still higher. 

This contempt for external difficulties, to be sure, 
does not hinder her from using the most unworthy 
methods. Her rights seem beyond question to her; so 
what does it matter how she secures them; especially 
since in this world, as she sees it, honest methods are 
bound to fail. Perhaps that is why she has transferred 
the battle for her rights from the field of song to an- 
other which she cares little about. Her supporters have 
let it be known that, according to herself, she feels quite 
capable of singing in such a way that ail levels of the 
populace, even to the remotest corners of the opposi- 
tion, would find it a real delight, a real delight not by 
popular standards, for the people affirm that they have 
always delighted in her singing, but a delight by her 



JOSEPHINE THE SINGER, OR THE MOUSE FOLK. 325 

own standards. However, she adds, since she cannot faL 
sify the highest standards nor pander to the lowest, her 
singing will have to stay as it is. But when it comes to 
her campaign for exemption from work, we get a differ- 
ent story; it is of course also a campaign on behalf of 
her singing, yet she is not fighting directly with the 
priceless weapon of her song, so any instrument she uses 
is good enough. Thus, for instance, the rumor went 
round that Josephine meant to cut short her grace notes 
if her petition were not granted. I know nothing about 
grace notes, and have never noticed any in Josephine’s 
singing. But Josephine is going to cut short her grace 
notes, not, for the present, to cut them out entirely, only 
to cut them short. Presumably she has carried out her 
threat, although I for one have observed no difference 
in her performance. The people as a whole listened in 
the usual way without making any pronouncement on 
the grace notes, nor did their response to her petition 
vary by a jot. It must be admitted that Josephine’s way 
of thinking, like her figure, is often very charming. 
And so, for instance, after that performance, just as if 
her decision about the grace notes had been too severe 
or too sudden a move against the people, she announced 
that next time she would put in all the grace notes 
again. Yet after the next concert she changed her mind 
once more, there was to be definitely an end of these 
great arias with the grace notes, and until her petition 
was favorably regarded they would never recur. Well, 
the people let all these announcements, decisions and 
counterdecisions go in at one ear and out at the other, 
like a grown-up person deep in thought turning a deaf 



326 JOSEPHINE THE SINGER, OR THE MOUSE FOLK. 

eai' to a child's babble, fundamentally well disposed but 
not accessible* 

Josephine, ho%vever, does not give in. The other day, 
for instance, she claimed that she had hurt her foot at 
work, so that it was difficult for her to stand up to sing; 
but since she could not sing except standing up, her 
songs would now have to be cut short. Although she 
limps and leans on her supporters, no one believes that 
she is really hurt. Granted that her frail body is extra 
sensitive, she is yet one of us and we are a race of work- 
ers; if we were to start limping every time we got a 
scratch, the whole people would never be done limp- 
ing, Yet though she lets herself be led about like a crip- 
ple, though she shows herself in this pathetic condition 
oftener than usual, the people all the same listen to her 
singing thankfully and appreciatively as before, but do 
not bother much about the shortening of her songs. 

Since she cannot very well go on limping forever, she 
thinks of something else, she pleads that she is tired, 
not in the mood for singing, feeling faint. And so we 
get a theatrical performance as well as a concert. We see 
Josephine’s supporters in the background begging and 
imploring her to sing. She would be glad to oblige, but 
she cannot. They comfort and caress her with flatteries, 
they almost carry her to the selected spot where she is 
supposed to sing. At last, bursting inexplicably into 
tears, she gives way, but when she stands up to sing, ob- 
viously at the end of her resources, weary, her arms not 
widespread as usual but hanging lifelessly down, so 
that one sets the impression that they are perhaps a lit- 
tle too short — lust as she is about to strike up, there, she 



JOSEPHINE THE SINGER, OR THE MOUSE FOLK ^27 

cannot do it after all, an unwilling shake of the head 
tells us SO and she breaks down before our eyes. To be 
sure, she pulls herself together again and sings, I fancy, 
much as usual; perhaps, if one has an ear for the finer 
shades of expression, one can hear that she is singing 
with unusual feeling, which is, however, all to the good. 
And in the end she is actually less tired than before, 
with a firm tread, if one can use such a term for her trip-- 
ping gait, she moves off, refusing all help from her sup^ 
porters and measuring with cold eyes the crowd which 
respectfully makes way for her. 

That happened a day or two ago; but the latest is 
that she has disappeared, just at a time when she was 
supposed to sing. It is not only her supporters who are 
looking for her, many are devoting themselves to the 
search, but all in vain; Josephine has vanished, she will 
not sing; she will not even be cajoled into singing, this 
time she has deserted us entirely. 

Curious, how mistaken she is in her calculations, the 
clever creature, so mistaken that one might fancy she 
has made no calculations at all but is only being driven 
on by her destiny, which in our world cannot be any- 
thing but a sad one. Of her own accord she abandons 
her singing, of her own accord she destroys the powei 
she has gained over people's hearts. How could she ever 
have gained that power, since she knows so little about 
these hearts of ours? She hides herself and does not 
sing, but our people, quietly, without visible disappoint- 
ment, a self-confident mass in perfect equilibrium, so 
constituted, even although appearances are misleading, 
that they can only bestow gifts and not receive them, 



328 JOSEPHINE THE SINGER, OR THE MOUSE FOLK 

even from Josephine, our people continue on their way, 

Josephine’s road, however, must go downhill. The 
time will soon come when her last notes sound and die 
into silence- She is a small episode in the eternal history 
of our people, and the people will get over the loss of 
her. Not that it will be easy for us; how can our gather- 
ings take place in utter silence? Still, were they not 
silent even when Josephine was present? Was her ac- 
tual piping notably louder and more alive than the 
memory of it will be? - Was it even in her lifetime more 
than a simple memory? Was it not rather because Jose- 
phine’s singing was already past losing in this way that 
i[)ur people in their wisdom prized it so highly? 

So perhaps we shall not miss so very much after all, 
while Josephine, redeemed from the earthly sorrows 
which to her thinking lay in wait for all chosen spirits, 
will happily lose herself in the numberless throng of 
the heroes of our people, and soon, since we are no his- 
torians, will rise to the heights of redemption and be 
forgotten like all her brothers. 



A senes oj juU-sized hhrmy editions of hooks that fonnnly 
were available only in cumbetsome and expensive sets, 
THE MODERN LIBRARY GIANTS REPRESENT A 
SELECTION OF THE WORLD’S GREATEST BOOKS 

These volumes contain fiom 600 to 1,400 pages each 


Gi. TOLSTOY, LEO War and Peace. 

G2. BOSWELL, JAMES. Life of Samuel Johnson. 

G3. HUGO, VICTOR Les Misciables. 

G4. THE COMPLETE POEMS OF KEATS AND SHELLEY. 

G5. PLUTARCH’S LIVES (The Dryden Translation). 

qO gibbon, EDWARD The Decline and Fall o£ the Roman 
J Empire (Complete in three volumes). 

G9.* GREAT VOICES OF THE REFORMATION 
Gio. TWELVE FAMOUS RESTORATION PLAYS (1660-1820) 
(Congreve, Wycherley, Gay, Goldsmith, Sheridan, etc.) 

Gii. JAMES, HENRY The Short Stories of 

Gi2. THE MOST POPULAR NOVELS OF SIR WALTER 

SCOTT (Quentin Durward, Ivanhoe and Kenilworth). 

G13. CARLYLE, THO.MAS. The French Revolution 
G14 BULFINCH’S MYTHOLOGY (Illustrated). 

G15 CERVANTES Don Quixote (Illustrated) 

G16. THE EUROPEAN PHILOSOPHERS FROM DESCARTES TO 
NIETZSCHE . 

G17 THE POEMS AND PLAYS OF ROBERT BROWNING. 

Gt8. ELEVEN PLAYS OF HENRIK IBSEN 

G19 the COMPLETE WORKS OF HOMER 

G20. THE LIFE AND WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM LINCOLN. 

G21. SIXTEEN FAMOUS AMERICAN PLAYS. 

G22. THIRTY FAMOUS ONE-ACT PLAYS. 

G23 TOLSTOY, LEO Anna Karenina. 

G24. LAMB, CHARLES The Complete Works and Letters of 
G25. THE COMPLETE PLAYS OF GILBERT AND SULLIVAN. 

G26. MARX, KARL. Capital 

G27. DARWIN, CHARLES. Origin of Species & The Descent of Man. 
G28. THE COMPLETE WORKS OF LEWIS CARROLL 
G29. PRESCOTT, WILLIAM H. The Conquest of Mexico and 
The Conquest of Peru, 

G30. MYERS, GUSTAVUS. History of the Great American 
Fortunes. 

G31. FAMOUS SCIENCE-FICTION STORIES: ADVENTURES IN 
TIME AND SPACE 

G32. SMITH, ADAM. The Wealth of Nations. 

G33. COLLINS, WILKIE. The Moonstone and The Woman in White. 
G34. NIETZSCHE, FRIEDRICH. The Philosophy of Nietzsche. 

G35. BURY, J. B. A History of Greece. 

G36. DOSTOYEVSKY, FYODOR. The Brothers Karamazov. 

G37. THE COMPLETE NOVELS AND SELECTED TALES OF 
NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE- 




G3S, HOLLAND ROMATN. lean-Chnstonhe, 

G39. THE BASIC WRITINGS OF SIGMUND FREUD 
G40. THE COMPLETE TALES AND POEMS OF EDGAR 
ALLAN POE. 

G41. FARRELL, JAMES T, Studs Lomgan. 

G42. THE POEMS AND PLAYS OF TENNYSON. 

G43. DEWEY, JOHN. Intelligence in the Modern World: John 
Dewey’s Philosophy. 

G44 DOS PASSOS, JOHN. U, S. A. 

G45. STOIC AND EPICUREAN PHILOSOPHERS. 

G46. A NEW ANTHOLOGY OF MODERN POETRY. 

G47. THE ENGLISH PHILOSOPHERS FROM BACON TO 
MILL. 

G48. THE METROPOLITAN OPERA GUIDE. 

G49 TWAIN, MARK. Tom Sawvcr and Huckleberry Finn. 

G50. WHITMAN, WALT. Leaves of Grass. 

G51. THE BEST-KNOWN NOVELS OF GEORGE ELIOT. 

G52. JOYCE, JAMES Ulysses. 

G53. SUE, EUGENE. The Wandering Jew. 

G54 AN ANTHOLOGY OF FAMOUS BRITISH STORIES. 

G55. O’NEILL, EUGENE. Nine Plays by 
G56. THE WISDOM OF CATHOLICISM. 

G57. MELVILLE. Selected Writings of Herman Melville. 

G58. THE COMPLETE NOVELS OF JANE AUSTEN. 

G59 THE WISDOM OF CHINA AND INDIA. 

G60 DOSTOYEVSKY, FYODOR. The Idiot. 

G61 SPAETH, SIGMUND. A Guide to Great Orchestral Music. 

G62. THE POEMS, PROSE AND PLAYS OF PUSHKIN. 

G63 SIXTEEN FAMOUS BRITISH PLAYS. 

G64 MELVILLE, HERMAN. Mohv Dick. 

G65 THE COMPLETh WORKS OF RABELAIS. 

G66, THREE FAMOUS MURDER NOVELS 
Before the Fact, Francis lies. 

Trent's Last Case, E. C. Bentley, 

The House of the Arrow, A. E. W. Mason. 

G67. ANTHOLOGY OF FAMOUS ENGLISH AND AMERI- 
CAN POETRY. 

G68. THE SELECTED WORK OF TOM PAINE. 

G69. ONE HUNDRED AND ONE YEARS’ ENTERTAIN- 
MENT. 

G70. THE COMPLETE POETRY OF JOHN DONNE AND 
WILLIAM BLAKE. 

G71. SIXTEEN FAMOUS EUROPEAN PLAYS 

G72. GREAT TALES OF TERROR AND THE SUPERNATURAL. 

G73. A SUB-TREASURY OF AMERICAN HUMOR. 

G74. ST, AUGUSTINE. The City of God. 

G75. SELECTED WRITINGS OF ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON- 

G76. GRIMM AND ANDERSEN, TALES OF 

G77. AN ANTHOLOGY OF FAMOUS AMERICAN STORIES. 

G78. HOLMES, OLIVER WENDELL. The Mind and Faith o£ 

Justice Holmes. 

G79. the wisdom of ISRAEL. 

G80. DREISER, THEODORE. An American Tragedy. 

G81. AN ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MODERN AMERICAN HUMOR 
G82. FAULKNER, WIILIAM, The Faulkner Reader 
