Copyright	©	1973	by	Schocken	Books,	Inc.

All	rights	reserved	under	International	and	Pan-American	Copyright	Conventions.	Published
in	the	United	States	by	Schocken	Books,	Inc.,	New	York.	Distributed	by	Pantheon	Books,	a
division	of	Random	House,	Inc.,	New	York.
Originally	published	in	Germany	as	Briefe	an	Felice	in	1967.
Copyright	©	1967	by	Schocken	Books,	Inc.	This	translation	first	published	in	hardcover	by
Schocken	Books,	Inc.,	in	1973.

LIBRARY	OF	CONGRESS	CATALOGING-IN-PUBLICATION	DATA

Kafka,	Franz,	1883–1924.
							Letters	to	Felice.

							(Schocken	classics)
							Translation	of:	Briefe	an	Felice	und	andere
Korrespondenz	aus	der	Verlobungszeit.
							Bibliography:	p.
							1.	Kafka,	Franz,	1883–1924—Correspondence.				2.	Bauer,	Felice,	1887–1960.				3.
Authors,	Austrian—20th	century—Correspondence.				I.	Bauer,	Felice,	1887–1960.				II.
Heller,	Erich,	1911–					.				III.	Born,	Jürgen.				IV.	Title.				V.	Series.
PT2621.A26Z48413				1988				833′.912				[B]						87-32232
eISBN:	978-0-8041-5076-7

Cover	design	by	Peter	Mendelsund

v3.1_r1



Contents

Cover
Title	Page
Copyright

Kafka’s	True	Will:	An	Introductory	Essay

Editors’	Note

Letters	to	Felice
Felice	Bauer
Grete	Bloch

NOTES

APPENDIX

CHRONOLOGY



Kafka’s	True	Will					
An	Introductory	Essay
ERICH	HELLER

“The	following	songs	are	the	work	of	an	unknown	minnesinger	from
the	 first	 half	 of	 the	 twentieth	 century”—if	 only	 it	 were	 possible	 to
begin	with	 these	words.	For	 if	 they	were	 true	 in	every	 respect—and
not	 only	 in	 the	 one	 still	 to	 be	 shown—the	 editors	 of	 these	 letters
would	 not	 be	 burdened	 with	 the	 problem	 of	 how	 to	 justify	 their
participation	 in	 this	 edition.	 As	 it	 is,	 the	 problem	 exists,	 not	 only
because	Franz	Kafka	had	asked	the	executor	of	his	last	will	to	destroy
his	 unpublished	 writings,	 and	 despite	 the	 precedents	 of	 similar
editions	 published	 in	 defiance	 of	 that	 testament.	 But	 precedents
cannot	dispel	our	scruples;	for	in	matters	of	ethics	no	appeal	to	rules
of	 custom	 is	 admissible,	 and	 certainly	 not	 to	 such	 as	 might	merely
make	a	norm	of	a	bad	habit.	However,	those	who	present	the	reader
with	the	fait	accompli	of	this	edition	should	not	trouble	him,	into	the
bargain,	 with	 their	 moral	 disquiet	 if	 they	 merely	 wished	 to	 soothe
their	 own	 consciences.	Yet	 a	 discussion	of	Kafka’s	 “will”	 is	 likely	 to
point	beyond	the	immediate	occasion	and	may	perhaps	help	us	better
to	 comprehend	 the	 not-easily-comprehensible	man	who	wrote	 these
letters.	 And	 as	 their	 writer	 is	 Franz	 Kafka—whose	 works	 have
presented	to	a	whole	epoch	the	mystery	for	which,	apparently,	it	has
long	 waited	 and	 in	 which,	 without	 being	 able	 to	 solve	 it,	 it	 has
recognized	its	own—it	is	possible	that	the	discussion	may	contribute	a
little	 to	our	self-understanding.	Thus	slightly	 to	diminish	 the	opaque
confusion	 of	 our	 age	 is	 an	 undertaking	 that	 perhaps	 needs	 no
justification.
The	“minnesongs”	are	love	letters	written	by	Franz	Kafka.	He	wrote
them	during	the	months	and	years	between	September	20,	1912,	and
October	16,	1917,	to	a	woman	whom,	as	was	at	times	his	conviction,
he	 wished	 to	 marry,	 to	 whom	 he	 twice	 became	 engaged	 and	 from
whom	 he	 twice	 parted.	 Should	 correspondences	 of	 this	 kind	 be
published	 at	 all?	 To	 ponder	 this	 question—quite	 apart	 from	 any



instructions	that	the	writer	himself	may	or	may	not	have	left	behind—
may	 indeed	 help	 a	 little	 to	 distinguish	 the	 sources	 that	 enrich	 the
mind	from	those	that	merely	add	to	today’s	plethora	of	printed	words.
Thus	 it	 is	 a	 useful	 question	 even	 if,	 as	 in	 this	 case,	 the	 lady	 who
received	 the	 letters	 agreed	 that	 they	 should	 be	 published	 after	 her
death,	 and	 although	whole	 libraries	 could	 by	 now	 be	 founded	with
volumes	 unwittingly	 produced	 by	 authors	 who	 did	 not	 suspect	 that
one	day	crowds	of	studious	adolescents	and	curious	adults	would	look
over	 their	 shoulders,	watching	 them	 in	 the	act	of	unburdening	 their
hearts	 in	presumed	privacy.	But	Kafka,	 suspicious	 latecomer	 that	he
was	 in	 the	 Romantic	 tradition	 of	 most	 secret,	 most	 private,	 most
inward,	 and	 yet	 eventually	 published	 intimacies,	 was	 of	 course
familiar	with	the	probability	of	such	indiscretions.	Indeed,	he	himself,
as	 these	 letters	 prove	 once	 more,	 was	 an	 avid	 reader	 of
autobiographical	 writings,	 epistles,	 and	 confessions,	 and	 sometimes
even	preferred	such	reading	to	that	of	the	writers’	actual	works.
It	was	Kafka’s	last	will	that	neither	his	letters	nor	his	diaries	should

survive	 him;	 nor,	 for	 that	 matter,	 his	 unpublished	 stories	 and
unfinished	novels.	When	he	made	this	request,	he	was	very	far	 from
having	attained	that	fame	which,	in	accordance	with	the	inescapable
laws	of	 literary	 scholarship	and	other	branches	of	 the	 literary	 trade,
forces	every	word	an	author	has	ever	written	upon	the	attention	of	the
reading	 public.	 And	 because	 he	 was	 at	 that	 time,	 despite	 several
publications,	 still	widely	unknown,	 it	may	well	be	asked	whether,	 if
his	 last	will	had	been	 fully	carried	out,	his	private	utterances	would
have	commanded	any	interest	at	all.	For	in	that	case	the	manuscripts
of	Amerika,	The	Trial,	and	The	Castle	would	have	been	destroyed;	and
surely	the	constant	bustle	surrounding	his	name	would	be	much	less
noisy	if	 these	books	did	not	exist.	Be	this	as	 it	may,	Kafka,	 inwardly
incapable	of	undoing	his	work	himself,	or	prevented	from	doing	so	by
external	circumstances,	demanded	of	his	disobediently	faithful	friend
Max	 Brod	 that	 he	 should	 “burn	 unread”	 all	 Kafka’s	 “diaries,
manuscripts,	 letters.…”	 The	 instruction,	 as	Max	 Brod	 tells	 us	 in	 the
Postscript	 to	 the	 First	 Edition	 of	 the	 (thus	 vainly	 condemned)
fragmentary	novel	The	Trial,	was	written	in	ink	on	an	undated	piece	of
paper,	 discovered,	 after	 Kafka’s	 death	 in	 1924,	 among	 many	 other
papers	in	one	of	Kafka’s	drawers.	Clearly	the	“will”	had	received	little
of	the	care	usually	given	to	such	documents.	Nor	was	the	futile	search
for	a	more	formal	testament	the	only	occasion	that	brought	this	piece
of	paper	before	Max	Brod’s	eyes.	Kafka	had	shown	it	to	him	before,	in



1921,	 and	 told	 him	 of	 the	 mandate	 it	 contained,	 whereupon	 Brod
vehemently	refused	ever	to	carry	it	out.
However,	 yet	 another	 “will”	 came	 to	 light	when	Kafka’s	desk	was

searched.	 Jotted	 down	 in	 pencil,	 it	 was	 again	 undated,	 but	 internal
evidence	proves	that,	contrary	to	Brod’s	assumption,	it	was	produced
later	than	the	instruction	written	in	ink	(which	Brod	believes	he	saw
as	early	as	1921),	for	it	refers	explicitly	to	stories	that	in	1921	did	not
yet	exist.	This	“testament”—most	probably	from	1922—was	not	quite
as	 destructive	 as	 the	 first.	 It	 gave	 permission,	 even	 if
unenthusiastically,	to	withhold	certain	manuscripts	from	the	auto-da-
fé:	six	stories	that,	in	any	case,	nobody	had	the	power	to	prevent	from
becoming	known,	 for	 five	were	already	published,	and	the	sixth	had
only	just	been	sent	to	the	publisher	by	the	author	himself.	This	list	of
mercy	consisted	of	The	Judgment,	The	Stoker	 (the	 first	 chapter	of	 the
novel	 Amerika),	 The	 Metamorphosis,	 The	 Penal	 Colony,	 A	 Country
Doctor,	 and	 “A	 Hunger	 Artist.”	 Again,	 no	 pardon	 was	 given	 to	 the
fragmentary	novels,	 letters,	and	diaries;	and	even	with	regard	to	 the
listed	works,	their	author	did	not	wish	anybody	to	take	much	trouble
for	them	to	be	“handed	down	to	posterity”;	“on	the	contrary,	should
they	disappear	altogether,	that	would	please	me	best.	Only,	since	they
do	 exist,	 I	 do	 not	 wish	 to	 hinder	 anyone	 who	 may	 want	 to,	 from
keeping	them.”	It	is	strange	that,	not	long	after	he	had	written	this,	he
himself	 felt	 so	 inclined:	 Kafka’s	 last	 literary	 activity	 consisted	 in
reading	 the	 proofs	 of	 the	 volume	 A	 Hunger	 Artist:	 Four	 Stories.	 It
“handed	down	 to	posterity”	 the	 story	 that	 gave	 the	book	 its	 title	 (it
had	appeared	for	the	first	time	in	October	1922	in	S.	Fischer’s	literary
magazine,	Die	 neue	 Rundschau)	 as	 well	 as	 “First	 Sorrow,”	 “A	 Little
Woman,”	 and	 “Josephine	 the	 Singer,	 or	 the	 Mouse	 Folk.”	 One	 of
these,	 “First	 Sorrow,”	 was	 written	 before	 “A	 Hunger	 Artist”	 and
should	have	been	burned	according	to	the	penciled	“will”;	yet	it	was
published	by	Kafka	himself	shortly	before	his	death.
It	is	clear	that	Max	Brod	had	good	reasons—or	at	least	good	doubts

—when	 he	 decided	 not	 to	 obey	 either	 of	 the	 two	 “wills.”	 Some	 of
these	reasons	and	doubts	he	stated	in	that	Postscript	to	The	Trial.	Yet
there	were	more	and	even	stronger	ones	which	he	either	overlooked
or	suppressed.	In	a	letter	of	June	26,	1922,	written	approximately	at
the	time	of	the	second	(penciled)	“will,”	Kafka	explained	to	his	friend
the	extremely	ambivalent	nature	of	his	“self-condemnation”	for	which
Brod	 had	 obviously	 reproached	 him.	 This	 negative	 attitude	 toward
himself	and	all	his	works	had,	Kafka	wrote,	 two	aspects:	on	 the	one



hand,	 it	 expressed	 what	 he	 “really”	 thought	 of	 his	 products,	 and
therefore	it	was	“the	truth”;	and	insofar	as	it	was	the	truth,	he	would
be	only	too	happy	to	snatch	“the	repulsive	little	tale”	(“First	Sorrow”)
he	had	just	sent	to	his	publisher,	Kurt	Wolff,	“from	Wolff’s	drawer	and
wipe	it	from	his	memory.”	But	on	the	other	hand,	he	wrote,	there	was
“method”	 in	 those	 condemnatory	 epistles	 that	 so	 frequently
accompanied	his	stories	on	their	way	to	the	publisher.	For	while	they
expressed	his	 true	estimate	of	his	work,	 they	were	also	calculated	to
make	 it	 impossible	 for	 the	 publisher	 to	 write	 back:	 You	 are	 quite
right;	 your	 stuff	 is	 no	 good;	 I	 am	 returning	 it	 to	 you.	 And	 it	 is	 “by
virtue	of	the	method”	that	the	publisher	is	so	radically	disarmed.	For
if	he	now	praises	what	Kafka	has	submitted,	he	is	not	doing	so	merely
for	 the	 sake	 of	 conventional	 courtesy;	 rather,	 he	 has	 been
“methodically”	 led	 truly	 to	 believe	 that	 there	 is	 evidence	 of	 genius
where	 the	 unjustly	 dejected	 author	 sees	 nothing	 but	 failure.	 And
Kafka	 concludes	 his	 letter	 to	 Brod	 by	 exclaiming:	 “What
investigations!”
Indeed,	 what	 investigations!	 Investigations	 such	 as	 Kafka,	 in

subsequent	letters,	refers	to	as	his	“Winkelzüge,”	his	shifts	and	crooked
moves.	What	Kafka’s	true	“will”	was—whether	its	words	were	valid	in
their	 literalness	 or	 in	 their	 “methodical”	 intent—would	 have	 been
hard	 to	 decide	 for	 anyone	 entrusted	 with	 carrying	 out	 his	 ruinous
order,	 let	 alone	 for	 his	 closest	 friend	 whose	 spiritual	 life	 was
determined	 in	 no	 small	 measure	 by	 the	 fondest	 admiration	 of	 the
other’s	works,	and	who	had,	moreover,	warned	him	that	he	would	not
act	as	such	an	executor.	Is	Kafka’s	instruction	not	a	little	reminiscent
of	the	“stratagem”	of	the	heroine	of	his	last	story,	the	singing	mouse
Josephine,	who,	although	 she	knew	only	one	desire,	namely,	 to	win
the	 “public,	 unambiguous,	 permanent	 recognition	 of	 her	 art,”
perversely	 refused	one	day	 to	 sing	 any	more—in	order	 to	 reach	her
goal;	 indeed	she	disappeared	altogether	so	that	people	should	search
for	 her	 and	 fiercely	 entreat	 her	 to	 give	 concerts	 again:	 “what
Josephine	really	wants	is	not	what	she	puts	into	words.”	On	July	10,
1914—one	 day	 before	 that	 journey	 to	 Berlin	which	 ended	with	 the
dissolution	of	his	first	engagement	to	Felice—Kafka	wrote	to	his	sister
Ottla	 who,	 familiar	 with	 the	 difficulties	 of	 that	 relationship,
presumably	had	asked	him	what	he	intended	to	achieve	by	his	visit:	“I
write	not	as	I	speak,	I	speak	not	as	I	 think,	I	 think	not	as	I	ought	to
think,	and	so	it	goes	on	into	the	deepest	darkness.”
What	then	is	Kafka’s	“true	will”	with	regard	to	his	works?	In	one	of



his	 last	 letters	 to	 Felice	 (October	 1,	 1917),	 he	 speaks	 of	 two	 beings
that	fight	each	other	within	himself;	or	rather,	he	says	that	he	is	their
fight	and	will	perish	 in	 their	 struggle.	And	although	 in	counting	 the
number	 of	 pugnacious	 souls	 in	 his	 breast	 he	 makes,	 as	 it	 were,	 a
mistake	 in	 his	 favor	 (for	 that	 fight	 is	 between	 many	 warriors,	 and
every	one	of	them	fights	every	other),	it	is	indeed	always	a	duel	that,
on	 any	 particular	 occasion,	 is	 being	 fought	 out,	 with	 the	 duelists
assuming	 the	 notorious	 German	 roles	 of	 Faust	 and	 Mephistopheles
even	if	they	speak	with	the	more	fatigued	voices	of	a	later	epoch.	The
one	asks,	after	the	manner	of	Goethe’s	Mephistopheles,	whether	there
was	 anything	 worth	 reading	 to	 be	 found	 in	 those	 works?	 Was	 the
“eternal	 void”	 not	 preferable?	 Yet	 the	 other,	 despite	 his	 dejection,
faintly	hopes	that	on	account	of	his	works	a	trace	at	least	of	his	days
on	earth	may	survive	throughout	the	eons.	Whereupon	the	first	again
tempts	him	with	the	question:	And	what	would	be	the	use	of	that?	Or,
as	 the	German-speaking	 Jews	 of	 Prague,	 Kafka’s	 fellow	 citizens	 and
inhabitants	 of	 the	 Café	 Arco,	 used	 to	 say:	 “Und	 wenn	 schon!”	 (“So
what?”).	 Kafka	 himself	 could	 not	 but	 resist	 the	 temptation	 of	 such
indifference.	 Indeed,	 again	 and	 again	 he	 stared	 with	 a	 kind	 of
passionate	melancholy	into	the	voids	of	the	human	spirit;	and	yet	his
craving	for	the	spiritual	consummation	of	the	time	given	to	him	was
equally	 impassioned.	Therefore	he	was	at	no	moment	of	his	 life	and
art	 capable	 of	 such	 skepticism	 (between	 “life”	 and	 “art”	 there
senselessly	officiates	here	an	“and”	which,	compelled	by	the	rules	of
language,	conjoins	what	are,	for	Kafka,	one	and	the	same	and	are	yet
in	 irreconcilable	 opposition).	 Kafka,	 ever	 anew,	 saw	 himself	 faced
with	incompatible	possibilities:	the	fame	of	the	artist,	for	instance,	or
the	 saving	 grace	 of	 oblivion;	marriage	 or	 the	 ascetic	 life.	 Hence	 he
often	 wavered	 with	 such	 vehemence	 and	 intensity	 that	 from	 a
distance	his	oscillations	looked	like	firmness.	In	such	paradoxes	lie	the
roots	 of	 Kafka’s	 extraordinary	 genius,	 a	 genius	 that	 prompted	 Max
Brod,	its	first	discoverer,	to	act	not	in	accordance	with	the	text	of	his
“will.”	Of	his	“will”	or	his	will?	But	Kafka’s	will	had	no	text,	and	his
text	no	will.
Hamlet,	 before	 him,	 suffered	 the	 same	 calamity.	 Hamlet’s	 self-

condemnations	 come	 from	 the	 same	origin	 as	Kafka’s;	 namely,	 from
the	discovery	that	his	soul	 is	subject	 to	 laws	radically	different	 from
those	that	rule	the	incomprehensible	“givenness”	of	the	external	life.
How	could	Fortinbras,	Kafka	asks	in	his	diary	in	September	1915,	say
that	Hamlet	had	conducted	himself	 truly	 like	a	king?	Royal	 conduct



where	 authentic	 existence	 has	 become	 impossible?	 For	 the
authenticity	of	life	rests	upon	the	natural	correspondence	between	the
inner	soul	and	disposition	of	a	man	and	the	external	world	in	which
he	exists.	Where	this	is	lacking,	authenticity	becomes	a	chimera,	and
wavering	 the	 only	 genuine	 action.	 It	 is	 the	 ethically	 most	 delicate
persons	 who	 tend	 to	 blame	 themselves	 for	 this	 imbalance	 between
mind	and	circumstance,	this	estrangement	of	the	soul	from	the	world,
and	indict	themselves	for	using	actors’	tricks,	 indeed	deceit,	when	in
truth	every	outward	sign	or	gesture—be	it	the	rejection	of	the	parental
home,	or	the	abandonment	of	a	senseless	profession,	or	marrying,	or
at	 times	 even	 the	 writing	 of	 words—is	 bound	 to	 strike	 them	 as	 a
coarsely	 false	 designation	 of	 the	 inner	 state.	 Before	 Kafka	 wrote	 to
Felice	on	October	1,	1917,	describing	his	disease	as	only	apparently
tuberculosis	but,	within,	a	weapon	wielded	by	himself	against	himself
(and	 this,	 he	 says,	 is	 the	 reason	 why	 there	 cannot	 be	 any	 cure	 for
him),	she	must	have	asked	him	whether	he	had	always	been	truthful
toward	 her.	 With	 the	 moral	 hypochondria	 of	 a	 man	 ready	 to	 feel
guiltily	responsible	for	what	he	knows	to	be	a	flaw	in	the	order	of	the
world,	he	answers	 that	he	has	 lied	very	 little,	 assuming	 that	his	 life
can	be	lived	at	all	with	“very	few	lies”:	“I	am	a	mendacious	creature;
for	me	it	is	the	only	way	to	maintain	an	even	keel,	my	boat	is	fragile.”
The	balance	that	 it	 is	 impossible	to	keep	without	 lying	is	surely	that
between	the	inner	and	the	outer	conditions,	and	the	instability	of	the
boat	is	due	to	the	fact	that	it	has	been	made	according	to	a	design	that
condemns	it	to	shipwreck	in	the	element	in	which	it	has	been	forced
to	move	 by	 a	 dispensation	 as	mysterious	 as	 it	 seems	malicious.	 But
this	 confession,	 false	 in	 its	 outward	 simplicity,	 is	 followed	 by	 the
typically	Kafkaesque	complication	that	comes	closer	to	the	truth.	Yes,
Kafka	writes,	he	does	want	to	deceive,	but	“without	actual	deception.”
Just	as	Hamlet’s	“acting”	is	nothing	but	a	theatrically	effective	code

in	a	situation	that	compels	the	inner	man	to	be	someone	else	as	soon
as	 he	 becomes	 active	 in	 the	 external	 sphere,	 so	 Kafka’s	 “deceiving
without	 deception”	 is	 merely	 the	 honest	 but	 futile	 toll	 paid	 by
language	at	the	broken	bridge	over	the	gulf	fixed	between	within	and
without.	“Deceiving	without	deception”—it	is	a	milder	version	of	the
phrase	with	which	he	 characterized	himself	when	 in	his	 diary	 (July
23,	1914)	he	described	the	family	scene	in	Berlin	at	the	dissolution	of
the	 first	 engagement:	 “Devilish	 in	 my	 innocence,”	 or	 of	 that	 with
which	 the	 father	 in	 “The	 Judgment”	 accuses	 his	 son:	 “An	 innocent
child,	yes,	that	you	were,	truly,	but	still	more	truly	have	you	been	a



devilish	human	being.”
This,	then,	is	the	question	that	the	letters	ask	with	terrible	urgency:

What	was	the	nature	of	the	relationship	between	Kafka	and	the	things
that,	according	to	a	universal	convention	he	himself	accepted	with	a
self-tormenting	 and	 quasi-religious	 resolution,	 make	 up	 the	 world’s
external	reality?	Was	his	 inner	 life,	and	thus	also	his	will,	 related	to
that	world	in	a	“natural”	manner?	That	is,	in	a	manner	expressible,	if
at	 all,	 not	 alone	 through	 his	 art—and	 even	 through	 his	 art	 only
obscurely;	for	his	is	an	art	more	poignantly	and	disturbingly	obscure
than	literature	has	ever	known.	Does	it,	therefore,	make	sense	at	all	to
speak	of	the	carrying-out	or	not-carrying-out	of	his	will,	if	this	will	is
perhaps	 untranslatable	 into	 anything	 that	 can	 “really”	 be	 willed	 or
done?	 Suppose	 Felice,	 long	 after	 these	 two	 futile	 wedding
preparations	 in	 two	 cities,	 long	 after	 the	 termination	 of	 the
engagement,	 perhaps	 long	 after	 Kafka’s	 death,	 had	 gathered	 the
courage	 to	 read	 these	 letters	 again,	 and	 then	 asked	 herself:	 Was	 it
really	“I”	whom	he	thought	he	loved?	Would	she	not	have	discovered
that	“she”	had	no	real	existence	on	these	sheets	of	paper?	Indeed,	as
the	 end	 of	 their	 liaison	 approached,	 he	 knew,	 and	 remarked	 in	 his
diary	 of	 September	 21,	 1917,	 that	 she,	 the	 “real”	 Felice,	 bore	 an
excessive	burden	of	unhappiness;	while	he,	the	artist	and	conjurer	of
the	 unreal,	 said	 of	 himself—perhaps	 unconsciously	 following	 the
model	 of	 Goethe’s	 Tasso—that	 where	 others	 would	 be	 silenced	 by
their	 pain,	 he,	 in	 his	 suffering,	 with	 his	 “head	 still	 smarting	 from
unhappiness,”	 was	 yet	 able	 to	 “go	 beyond	 that	 and	 with	 as	 many
flourishes	as	I	have	the	talent	for	…	ring	simple,	or	contrapuntal,	or	a
whole	orchestration	of	changes	on	my	 theme”	(diary,	September	19,
1917).	Must	she	not	have	felt	most	terribly	betrayed,	although	he	had
never	 deceived	 her	 intentionally,	 and	 even	 if	 she	 recognized	 that
nothing	ever	had	raised	her	so	high	as	did	the	incandescent	language
of	his	letters?
As	deeply	problematical	as	Kafka’s	love,	was	his	attitude	toward	his

writing.	And	 this	 is	why	 the	 “true”	 executor	 of	 his	will	would	 have
had	to	be	a	magician,	the	producer	of	a	sequence	of	mythical	scenes
where	his	works,	after	 they	had	been	burned,	would	rise	again	from
the	ashes,	purified,	in	unheard-of	beauty	and	perfection,	consisting	of
nothing	but	“sheer	light,	sheer	freedom,	sheer	power,	no	shadow,	no
barrier.”	 Thus	 Schiller	 once	 described	 his	 highest	 poetic	 aspiration;
and	Kafka,	after	completing	“A	Country	Doctor”	 in	September	1917,
confided	 to	 his	 diary	 that	 writing	 such	 stories	 could	 still	 give	 him



“passing	 satisfaction,”	 but	 happiness	 he	 would	 know	 only	 if	 he
succeeded	 in	 “raising	 the	 world	 into	 the	 pure,	 the	 true,	 and	 the
immutable.”	 Often	 it	 seems	 that	 Kafka	 had	 no	will	 except	 this;	 and
this	one	aspired	to	a	world	in	which	no	“last	wills”	had	to	be	made,
because	 it	was	that	“spiritual	world”	which,	he	once	said,	alone	had
true	existence:	“What	we	call	the	world	of	the	senses	is	the	evil	in	the
spiritual	world”;	and	the	never-satisfied	claim	he	made	upon	art,	his
art,	was	that	it	should	cleanse	the	only	true	world,	the	spiritual	one,
of	the	evil	in	it—by	means	of	the	absolute	perfection	of	its	language.
Certainly	 language	 is	 the	 most	 common	 possession	 of	 all	 men:	 all
people	speak,	just	as	in	the	nation	of	mice	everyone	whistles,	but	only
in	 the	whistling	 of	 Kafka’s	 artist,	 the	 singing	mouse	 Josephine,	 is	 it
“free	 from	 the	 fetters	 of	 daily	 life	 and	 it	 sets	 us	 free	 too	 for	 a	 little
while.”
Flaubert	meant	 so	much	 to	 Kafka	 that	 he	 could	 have	 said	 of	 him

what	he	once	wrote	to	Felice	of	Strindberg	(October	26,	1916):	“One
has	 only	 to	 close	 one’s	 eyes	 and	 one’s	 own	 blood	 delivers	 lectures”
about	him.	And	it	was	Flaubert	who	once	dreamed	of	“writing	a	book
about	nothing	at	all,	a	book	that	would	have	not	the	slightest	bearing
upon	 the	external	world	and	would	be	held	 together	entirely	by	 the
inner	force	of	its	style.”	This	ambition,	which	in	the	case	of	Flaubert
aimed	at	absolute	aestheticism,	with	Kafka	took	off	its	aesthetic	mask
and	clearly	showed	its	religious	features:	Kafka	once	called	his	writing
a	 form	 of	 prayer;	 and	whenever	 he	 tried	 to	 convince	 Felice	 that	 he
must	not	marry,	he	almost	always	spoke	of	his	literary	vocation	as	if
its	 fulfillment	depended	upon	his	keeping	a	monk’s	vow	of	celibacy.
His	notebook	contains	this	entry:	“The	world—F.	is	its	representative
—and	my	ego	are	tearing	my	body	apart	in	a	conflict	that	there	is	no
resolving.”
Only	if	his	writing	goes	well	has	he	the	strength	to	live:	this	he	tells

her	again	and	again,	and	as	early	as	November	1,	1912,	he	confesses
that,	had	he	met	her	“during	a	barren	period,”	he	would	never	have
been	 courageous	 enough	 to	 approach	 her.	 But	 if	 there	 is,	 for	 once,
such	rare	abundance	of	productive	energy,	he	must	not	waste	it	upon
“living.”	For	when	he	is	deserted	by	his	art,	he	feels	forsaken	by	God
and	cannot	live	up	to	the	demands	of	any	human	relationship.
If	ever	there	was	a	truly	vicious	circle,	this	is	it.	Even	in	the	initial

stages	 of	 their	 correspondence	 she,	 with	 the	 instinct	 of	 a	 woman
threatened	 by	 a	 powerful	 rival,	 had	 obviously	 counseled	 him	 to	 be
more	moderate	in	his	literary	dedication.	No,	he	replies	on	November



5,	1912,	he	would	be	a	“hopeless	fool”	if	he	did	what	she	requests:	“If
I	 spare	myself	 in	 this	 respect,	 I	 am	 not	 really	 sparing	myself,	 I	 am
committing	suicide”;	it	is	quite	possible	that	his	writing	is	“worthless”;
but	if	so,	then	he	too	is	“definitely	and	without	doubt	worthless.”	And
although	 his	 anxieties	 at	 the	 prospect	 of	 marriage	 seem	 sometimes
prompted	by	the	fear	of	sexual	impotence,	they	are	also,	and	probably
much	more	 so,	 due	 to	 his	misgivings	 about	 a	manner	 of	 living	 that
might	be	the	betrayal	of	his	inmost	truth.
And	was	human	sexuality	not	more	than	anything	else	cursed	with

that	curse	that	had	upset	the	congruity	between	within	and	without?
Was	it	not	unavoidable	that	for	him	the	unequivocal	directness	of	the
act	 of	 love	 should	 persistently	 be	 brought	 into	 question	 by	 inner
voices	 denying	 that	 it	 was	 true	 to	 the	 complex	 inner	 state?	 One	 of
these	voices	makes	itself	heard	in	a	diary	note	of	July	5,	1916:	“The
hardships	of	living	together.	Forced	upon	us	by	strangeness,	pity,	lust,
cowardice,	vanity,	and	only	deep	down,	perhaps,	a	 thin	 little	stream
worthy	of	 the	name	of	 love,	 impossible	 to	seek	out,	 flashing	once	 in
the	moment	of	a	moment.”	This	was	written	during	the	few	summer
days	of	1916	that	he	spent	in	Marienbad	with	Felice	who	then,	most
likely	for	the	first	time,	was	his	mistress.	Years	afterwards,	those	days
shine	in	his	memory	with	the	light	of	a	perplexed	happiness;	and	yet
even	 then	 they	are	 recalled	not	without	doubt	and	a	 little	 terror.	At
the	 end	 of	 January	 1922,	 he	 was	 in	 the	 Bohemian	 resort	 of
Spindlermühle.	What	would	it	be	like,	he	asks	in	his	diary,	if	Milena—
the	woman	whose	love	then	dominated	his	life—joined	him	there?	Of
course,	it	would	give	him	some	pleasure;	and	yet	it	would	be	terrible:
“I	 should	 be	 plunged	 into	 a	 world	 in	 which	 I	 could	 not	 live.”	 And
then:	“It	only	remains	to	solve	the	riddle	of	why	I	had	fourteen	days
of	 happiness	 in	 Marienbad.”	 Whatever	 may	 be	 the	 solution	 to	 this
riddle,	one	answer	may	well	be	that	he	was	not	all	that	happy,	or	at
least	that	his	happiness	did	not	last	two	weeks.	In	any	case,	whatever
he	may	have	felt	six	years	ago,	now,	he	says,	it	is	too	late.	Let	others
be	in	love	and	make	love;	for	himself,	this	is	now	unthinkable:	“I	am
too	far	away,	am	banished.”	True,	he	has	a	few	representatives	in	the
regions	 “down	 there,”	 but	 his	 main	 sustenance	 grows	 “from	 other
roots	in	other	climes.”
Was	 it,	 then,	 his	 writing	 that	 came	 from	 those	 roots	 or	 breathed

that	air?	Sometimes	he	seemed	to	believe	this.	During	such	periods	his
“true	life”	consisted	in	defending	his	writing	desk,	and	happiness	was
in	writing	well.	Melancholy	threatened	when	he	wrote	badly,	disaster



when	he	 reached	a	dead	point.	Then	his	 laments	 sounded	as	 if	 they
were	for	a	lost	love;	but	he	was	referring	to	his	stories	when	he	spoke
of	 their	 “withdrawing”	 from	 him,	 “rejecting”	 him,	 or	 “denying
themselves”	to	him.	If	for	some	time	he	was	unable	to	write,	he	was
“in	a	void.”	On	June	26,	1913,	he	wrote	Felice	that	only	in	the	depth
of	 writing	 resided	 his	 center	 of	 gravity,	 and	 he	 apparently	 had	 no
notion	how	much	 she	must	have	been	hurt	by	his	 telling	her	at	 the
same	time	 that	 she	had	 this	much	 in	common	with	his	 job	 (and	she
knew	of	course	that	he	detested	it):	that	she	too	was	“on	the	surface	of
life.”	Thus	a	marriage	with	her	would	be	compatible	with	 the	office
but	not	with	his	existence	as	a	writer.

Was	 his	 “true”	 life	 then	 rooted	 in	 literature?	 It	 would	 be	 unduly
simple	to	put	it	 like	this.	An	amateur	graphologist,	whom	Felice	had
met	during	a	vacation,	had	“analyzed”	Kafka’s	character	for	her	from
his	handwriting.	 She	 sent	him	 the	 result.	 “The	man	 in	 your	pension
should	 leave	 graphology	 alone,”	 Kafka	 replied	 on	 August	 14,	 1913.
For	 his	 findings	 were	 all	 wrong:	 neither	 is	 he,	 Kafka,	 “very
determined”	 in	his	actions	nor	“extremely	 sensual”;	on	 the	contrary,
he	has	a	“magnificent,	inborn	capacity	for	asceticism.”	And	so	on,	and
nothing	 whatever	 in	 that	 person’s	 findings	 is	 correct.	 But	 the	 most
absurdly	false	thing	to	say	of	him	is	that	he	is	interested	in	literature.
There	 is	no	grain	of	 truth	 in	 this,	Kafka	protests:	 “I	have	no	 literary
interests,	but	am	made	of	literature,	I	am	nothing	else,	and	cannot	be
anything	else.”	And	then	he	goes	on	to	tell	her	a	little	episode	from	a
history	 of	 Satanism	 he	 was	 just	 reading:	 A	 monk	 had	 the	 gift	 of
singing	 so	 beautifully	 that	 everybody	 who	 heard	 him	 listened	 with
sheer	delight.	But	one	day	another	cleric	believed	he	recognized	 the
voice	of	Satan	 in	 that	 loveliness	and	proceeded	to	exorcise	him;	and
the	singer	whose	life	resided	entirely	in	his	gift	of	song	dropped	dead
and	 his	 body	 began	 at	 once	 to	 decay.	 “The	 relationship,”	 Kafka
comments,	 “between	me	 and	 literature	 is	 similar	…	 except	 that	my
literature	 is	 not	 as	 sweet	 as	 that	 monk’s	 voice.”	 This	 means,	 as	 he
warns	 Felice	 again	 on	 August	 22,	 1913,	 that	 as	 his	wife	 she	would
have	 to	 lead	 “a	monastic	 life	 at	 the	 side	 of	 a	man	who	 is	 peevish,
miserable,	 silent,	 discontented,	 and	 sickly,”	 who	 “is	 chained	 to
invisible	literature	by	invisible	chains.”	And	two	days	later	he	affirms
once	more	that	he	has	no	“bent	for	writing,”	as	she	must	have	called
it	in	a	letter	to	him;	no,	certainly	not,	he	answers,	this	is	no	“bent”:	“A



bent	can	be	uprooted	and	crushed.	But	this	 is	what	I	am.”	It	 follows
that	what	he	expected	of	the	executor	of	his	will	was	aid	in	a	kind	of
posthumous	suicide.
He	 is	nothing	but	 literature,	he	says;	and	he	says	 it	 so	often,	with
such	determination,	 and	 in	 such	 excellent	 prose	 as	 nobody	has	 ever
said	what	he	did	not	believe.	Yet	not	less	frequently,	and	with	equal
determination,	and	surely	not	in	worse	prose,	he	says	still	more:	that
for	 this	 reason	he	has	 forfeited	his	chances	of	 salvation.	No	doubt	 it
seemed	to	him	that	his	“true	life”	consisted	in	writing,	that	his	whole
existence	had	its	“center	of	gravity”	in	the	depth	of	literary	creation,
that	 through	 art	 alone	 he	might	 raise	 the	world	 into	 “the	 pure,	 the
true,	and	the	immutable,”	and	that	marriage	or	profession,	indeed	the
whole	world	as	perceived	through	the	senses,	was	nothing	but	the	evil
in	 the	 only	 “real”—the	 spiritual—world,	 a	world	 that	 art,	 and	 only
art,	could	make	accessible	to	the	senses	without	itself	 falling	prey	to
evil.	But	it	merely	seemed	so.	“In	reality”	it	was	precisely	at	this	point
that	the	devil	lay	in	wait	for	his	chosen	victim:	for	him	who	deluded
himself	with	such	superstitions.	Kafka’s	faith	in	the	high	spiritual	rank
of	his	art	was	indeed	an	intermittent	one;	more	often	he	believed	that
art	was	his	curse.
In	a	 long	 letter	 that	Kafka	wrote	 to	Max	Brod	at	 the	beginning	of
July	1922,	the	condemnation	of	his	art—and,	it	would	seem,	not	only
of	his—reaches	 its	 climax.	 “Writing	 sustains	me,”	Kafka	 says	 in	 that
letter,	as	he	said	so	often	 to	Felice.	But	what	 sort	of	 life	 is	 it	 that	 is
thus	sustained?	An	extremely	questionable	one:	“Writing	is	a	delicious
reward.	But	for	what?	During	the	last	night	the	answer	was	as	clear	to
me	as	a	lesson	meant	for	little	children:	reward	for	services	rendered
to	the	devil.”	And	this	is	followed	by	Kafka’s	description,	as	grand	as
it	 is	precise,	of	what	he	 sees	as	devilish	 in	writing:	 “This	descent	 to
dark	powers,	this	unbinding	of	spiritual	forces	whose	nature	it	is	to	be
bound	 together,	 these	 dubious	 embraces	 and	 what	 else	 may	 go	 on
down	there	that	is	forgotten	when	one	writes	one’s	stories	in	the	light
of	the	sun.	Perhaps	there	is	also	another	kind	of	writing.	I	know	only
this.”
In	 the	 letters	 to	 Felice,	 Kafka	 never	 tires	 of	 indicting,	 with
apparently	inexhaustible	resourcefulness,	the	pursuit	of	literature	as	a
form	of	living.	For	him,	this	manner	of	existence	is	“devilish”	because
of	 the	 insatiable	 sense	 of	 aesthetic	 enterprise	 with	 which	 the	 artist
builds	 imaginary	 houses	 and	 palaces	 in	 order	 to	 look	 at	 them
admiringly	 and	offer	 them	 to	 the	 admiring	 inspection	of	 other	men,



while	as	a	“human	being”	he	is	without	a	home.	“It	is,”	Kafka	writes
in	 that	 letter	 to	 Brod,	 the	 artist’s	 “vanity	 and	 love	 of	 pleasure	 that
perpetually	 gyrate	 around	 and	 delight	 in	 himself,	 or	 even	 someone
else—in	 which	 case	 the	 movement	 multiplies	 and	 becomes	 a	 solar
system	 of	 vanities”;	 it	 is,	 furthermore,	 the	 “unreality”	 of	 poetic
existence	 that,	 more	 “mortal”	 than	 any	 other	 mortal	 life,	 “cannot
last,”	 is	 “not	 even	made	of	 dust”	 but	 is	 “a	mere	 construction	 of	 the
chase	after	pleasure.”	What	others	know	as	the	self	 is,	 in	the	case	of
the	poet,	debarred	from	eternal	life	because	it	has	lived	not	even	once.
“I	have	remained	clay,”	Kafka	writes,	“I	have	not	used	 the	spark	 for
making	 fire	 but	 merely	 for	 illuminating	 my	 deadness.”	 At	 the
beginning	of	August	1914—perhaps	because	Europe	behaved	at	 that
time	 as	 if	 she	 insisted	 upon	 becoming	 more	 “real”	 every	 day—he
notes	in	his	diary	with	the	utmost	clarity	the	consumptive	manner	of
his	 experiencing	 the	 real:	 “My	 talent	 for	 portraying	 my	 dreamlike
inner	life	has	thrust	all	other	matters	into	the	background.”
He	demanded	of	Felice	that	she	should	write	to	him	more	and	more
often	in	order	to	assure	him	of	his	own	self	and	their	love	in	the	only
form	truly	appropriate	to	him	(if	he	was	not	in	the	mood	to	implore
her	to	write	less	because	the	arrival	of	a	letter	made	him	incapable	of
dealing	 with	 the	 business	 of	 the	 day).	 And	 once,	 when	 she	 had
obviously	apologized	 for	not	having	written	a	 letter	he	expected,	he
replied	 (during	 the	 night	 of	 February	 21–22,	 1913):	 “Neither	 in	 the
office	 nor	 in	 the	 tram	 could	 you	write	 to	me.	 Shall	 I	 tell	 you	why,
dearest?	 You	 didn’t	 know	 whom	 to	 write	 to.	 I	 am	 no	 target	 for
letters.”	For	he	did	not	really	exist;	he	only	existed,	he	thought,	in	the
“unreality”	of	literature.
This	is	the	curse:	He	is	nothing	when	he	cannot	write;	and	he	is	in	a
different	 kind	 of	 nothingness	 if,	 rarely	 enough,	 he	 believes	 he	 has
written	well.	As	 early	as	 the	 first	weeks	of	 their	 correspondence,	he
tells	Felice	(November	1,	1912)	 that,	whenever	he	 is	unsuccessful	 in
his	 attempts	 to	 write,	 he	 lies	 collapsed	 on	 the	 floor,	 “fit	 for	 the
dustbin.”	 This	 is	 clearly	 an	 allusion	 to	 that	 “exceptionally	 repulsive
story”	 (as	 he	 calls	The	Metamorphosis	 in	 the	 letter	 of	 November	 24,
1912)	 where	 at	 the	 end	 the	 charwoman	 applies	 the	 broom	 to	 the
insect	corpse	of	Gregor	Samsa,	and	afterwards	 laughingly	announces
to	 his	 parents	 and	 sister	 that	 they	 need	 not	 worry	 any	more	 about
“how	 to	 get	 rid	 of	 the	 thing	 next	 door.”	 And	 on	 November	 29–30,
Kafka,	writing	during	a	night	that	has	been	sleepless	with	frustration,
promises	Felice	that	in	future	he	will	behave	more	like	an	affectionate



fiancé:	 for	 “surely	 I	 can’t	 be	 utterly	 thrown	 out	 of	my	writing	 after
having	thought	more	than	once	that	I	was	sitting	in	its	center,	settled
in	 its	comforting	warmth.”	Small	wonder	 that,	not	 so	 long	after	 this
sorrowful	love	letter	(addressed,	it	would	seem,	more	to	his	art	than
to	Felice),	during	the	night	of	January	14–15,	1913,	when	apparently
his	 work	 is	 going	 well,	 he	 confides	 what	 surely	 must	 remain
incomprehensible	to	her:	 that	he	will	be	a	 faithless	husband	because
night	after	night	he	will	commit	adultery	with	his	writing.	Innocently
and	cluelessly,	she	had	obviously	told	him	that	she	would	sit	up	with
him	while	 he	was	writing.	 No,	 he	 replies,	 that	would	make	writing
quite	 impossible	 for	 him	 because	 even	 the	 loneliest	 night	 was	 not
night	enough	to	give	him	the	stillness	and	solitude	he	needs	for	it.	For
writing	demands	surrender	without	the	slightest	restraint,	a	degree	of
sincerity	and	honesty	from	which	a	man,	“as	long	as	he	is	in	his	right
mind,”	must	refrain	in	his	dealings	with	other	people,	be	it	the	most
beloved	 person.	 For	 the	 ground	 on	 which	 he	 stands—or	 even	 two
human	beings	stand	together—begins	to	shake	as	soon	as	that	“truer
emotion”	 wells	 up	 in	 him	 which	 alone	 can	 give	 valid	 form	 to	 the
work:	“I	have	often	thought	that	the	best	mode	of	life	for	me	would	be
to	 sit	 in	 the	 innermost	 room	 of	 a	 spacious	 locked	 cellar	 with	 my
writing	 things	 and	 a	 lamp.…	 And	 how	 I	 would	 write!	 From	 what
depths	I	would	drag	it	up!	Without	effort!	For	extreme	concentration
knows	no	effort.	The	trouble	is	that	I	might	not	be	able	to	keep	it	up
for	 long,	 and	 at	 the	 first	 failure—which	 perhaps	 even	 in	 these
circumstances	 could	 not	 be	 avoided—would	 be	 bound	 to	 end	 in	 a
grandiose	fit	of	madness.”

Only	when	Kafka	dwells	 in	his	writing	does	he	dwell	 in	his	 truth.
This	truth	is	not	to	be	found	anywhere	else.	For	it	is	such	that	he	who
has	lived	with	it	must	become	insane	if	he	is	deprived	of	 it;	and	life
itself,	 the	 world	 in	 which,	 for	 instance,	 marriages	 are	made,	 is	 this
deprivation.	Would	she	please	 tell	her	“cellar-dweller”	what	she	will
think	of	that,	after	she	has	become	his	beloved	and	deceived	wife?	But
he	saves	her	the	trouble	of	an	answer.	Half	a	year	later,	in	his	letter	of
August	22,	1913,	he	says	it	himself:	If	the	truth	of	what	he	writes	is	to
be	measured	in	terms	of	the	“real”	(and	here	truth	changes	sides	again
and	 emerges	 now	 as	 the	 ally	 of	 “reality”),	 the	 result	 of	 such	 an
assessment	 would	 be,	 he	 says,	 an	 unfathomable	 disproportion,	 a
disproportion	to	which	much	later,	 in	a	 letter	to	Max	Brod	(July	22,



1922),	he	gives	a	simple	and	exact	name:	lie.	At	that	time	he	had	just
read	the	memoirs	of	the	German	writer	and	poet	Theodor	Storm,	and
quoted	the	conversation	Storm	and	the	poet	Eduard	Mörike	once	had
about	Heinrich	Heine,	whom	 they	 both	 admired.	Mörike	 said	 in	 his
homely	Swabian	dialect:	“He	is	a	poet	 through	and	through,	but	not
for	a	quarter	of	an	hour	could	I	live	with	him:	because	of	the	lie	right
in	the	middle	of	his	being.”	And	Kafka	comments:	“And	this	is,	at	least
seen	 from	 one	 angle,	 a	 brilliant	 summing-up	 of	what	 I	 think	 of	 the
writer”—of	any	writer.
Once	 again	 literature,	which	 only	 a	 little	while	 ago	 had	 been	 the

purest	 servant	 of	 truth,	 shaking	 to	 their	 foundations	 all	 illusory
“realities,”	 is	 itself	 the	 purest	 lie.	 And	why?	 Because	 it	 demands	 of
him	who	practices	it,	indeed	who	is	literature,	the	abandonment	of	the
real	 world.	 Thus	 it	 is	 not	 surprising	 that	 again	 and	 again	 Kafka	 is
tempted	 to	 side	 with	 the	 world	 against	 himself.	 And	 how	 well	 the
world	 sometimes	 fared	 in	 his	 care!	 Immeasurably	 better	 than	 it
deserved!	 The	 writer	 who	 like	 no	 other	 has	 anticipated	 in	 his
imagination	 the	 horrors	 of	 an	 epoch	 that	 began	 with	 World	 War	 I
accepted,	as	again	these	letters	show,	the	war	itself	 in	the	matter-of-
fact	manner	of	the	many	who	easily	become	reconciled	to	whatever	it
is	 that	 happens.	Moreover,	 he	 saw	 the	war	 as	 his	 chance	 to	 escape
into	a	real	battle	from	the	agony	of	the	unreal	one	that	went	on	in	his
brain	and	heart.	On	August	27,	1916,	he	noted	in	his	diary:	“There	is
no	question	of	your	first	task:	to	become	a	soldier.”	He	made	several
efforts	in	this	direction,	even	if,	very	probably,	in	the	way	in	which	he
had	made	many	other	efforts:	in	the	sure	expectation	of	failure.	Before
the	war,	he	never	questioned	the	crisis-ridden	and	fragile	“reality”	of
the	late	Habsburg	monarchy.	In	this	respect	he	was	not	different	from
any	 other	 loyal	 subject	 of	 the	 Emperor.	 Indeed,	 he	 was	 in	 the
apocalyptic	mood	 “to	 advocate	 retreat	…	 for	 everything”	 (to	 Felice,
October	 27,	 1912)	 because	 on	 the	 Balkan	 Peninsula	 the	 political
situation	 became	 more	 and	 more	 menacing	 to	 Austria.	 True,	 he
detested	the	noisy	processions	of	patriotic	crowds	hailing	the	Austrian
declaration	of	war:	these,	he	wrote	in	his	diary,	belonged	to	the	most
repugnant	occurrences	accompanying	the	war;	and	he	turned—almost
in	the	manner	of	the	Jewish	Viennese	satirist	Karl	Kraus—anti-Semitic
by	blaming	them	on	the	Jewish	merchants	“who	are	German	one	day,
Czech	 the	 next.”	 Yet	 he	 blamed	 himself	 and	 not	 the	 event	 for
whatever	was	negative	in	his	feelings	about	the	war.	He	was,	he	said,
an	 “empty	 vessel”	 that	 was	 yet	 “full	 of	 lies,	 hate,	 and	 envy”;	 he



discovered	nothing	but	wickedness	in	his	heart:	“pettiness,	indecision,
envy,	 and	hatred	against	 those	who	are	 fighting.”	 Later,	 on	April	 5,
1915,	when	 Felice	 had	 obviously	 asked	 him	whether	 the	war	made
him	 suffer,	 he	 answered	 that,	 if	 he	 suffered,	 then	 it	 was	 mostly
because	 “I	myself	 am	 taking	 no	 part.”	 One	month	 later,	 on	May	 6,
1915,	 he	 wrote	 that	 he	 would	 be	 happy	 to	 become	 a	 soldier.	 Very
soon	he	was	to	have	his	medical	examination,	and	Felice	should	wish,
as	much	as	he	did	himself,	that	they	will	“accept”	him.
If	 one	 seriously	 believes	 that	 Kafka	 is	 very	 important	 for	 our
understanding	 of	 the	 age	 in	 which	 he	 lived	 and	 wrote,	 then,	 for	 a
while	at	least,	one	ought	to	turn	a	deaf	ear	to	the	din	of	analyses	that
find	 the	 causes	 of	 our	 wars	 and	 other	 troubles	 exclusively	 in
colonialism,	class	struggles,	and	the	dialectics	of	history;	and	ought	to
listen	 instead	 to	 the	 still	 voice	 with	 which	 a	 man,	 despairing	 of
himself,	opts	for	a	world	that,	spiritually	forsaken	as	it	is,	cannot	but
destroy	itself.
On	September	20,	1912,	Kafka	wrote	his	first	letter	to	Felice	whom,
whether	he	knew	it	or	not,	he	had	sought	out	as	his	refuge	from	the
onrush	of	his	“unreality.”	Three	months	later,	on	New	Year’s	Eve,	he
already	had	a	distinct	premonition	of	the	final	futility	of	his	attempt
to	 escape,	 and	 wrote	 her	 the	 astonishing	 letter	 which	 is,	 from
beginning	 to	 end,	 “literature,”	 “true”	 literature.	 In	 this	 letter	 he
demands	her	answer	 to	a	question	which,	when	 it	comes	 to	 it,	 is	no
question	 at	 all	 but	 a	 description	 of	 himself	 in	 his	 exceedingly
problematical	relationship	to	her	and	to	the	world	(even	the	wording
of	the	“question”	is	reminiscent	of	his	aphorism	“You	are	the	task.	No
pupil	far	and	wide”):	he	has,	he	says,	put	his	question	in	“more	than
plain”	 form	because	he	wants	 her	 answer	 too	 to	 be	 overprecise	 and
given	 “independent	 from	 every	 point	 of	 view,	 even	 from	 that	 of
reality”	 (overprecise	 to	 the	 point	 of	 the	 unreal—what	 an	 admirable
characterization	of	his	own	work!).	And	he	concludes	his	 letter	with
the	 wish	 to	 draw	 her	 “closer,	 closer,	 closer”	 to	 himself;	 but	 at	 this
point	 he	 appears	 to	 have	 been	 overcome	 by	 the	 suspicion	 that	 he
desires	the	impossible	because	she	and	he	live	in	different	worlds,	he
in	his	own—as	he	thought—non-world,	and	she—well,	she	in	Berlin.
“Where	are	you	at	this	moment?”	he	asks,	“From	whose	company	am
I	drawing	you	away?”	On	the	surface,	to	be	sure,	he	meant	only	some
Berlin	New	Year’s	party,	but	as	he	roused	himself	from	the	immersion
in	his	letter,	he	may	well	have	known	how	menacingly	much	he	said:
not	“from	whose	company,”	but	possibly	out	of	human	society	as	such.



Overprecise	 to	 the	point	of	 the	unreal:	 this	 is	certainly	 true	of	 the
letter	of	November	12,	1912,	in	which,	three	months	and	a	half	after
the	occurrence,	he	describes	to	her	the	evening	of	August	13,	when	he
met	her	for	the	first	time.	Testimony	to	love	at	first	sight?	To	an	eye
immensely	 sharpened	 by	 that	 love?	 To	 a	 memory	 enhanced	 in	 its
exactitude	by	the	incipient	passion?	Possibly	so;	yet	at	the	same	time
it	is	a	document	of	that	literary	realism	which	has	invited	the	epithet
“magic,”	 one	 of	 those	 documents	 that,	 through	 their	 hectic
meticulousness,	reveal	 the	anxiety	of	an	 imagination	more	and	more
enclosed	within	 itself	 and	 therefore	 fearing	 that	 it	might	 in	 the	 end
lose	 the	 real	 altogether	 if	 it	 does	 not	 intensely	watch	over	 its	 every
detail.	 In	such	a	hypnotically	“realistic”	description	 there	 is	no	 trace
to	be	 found	of	 that	composure	of	mind	with	which	Homer	describes
the	shield	of	Achilles,	knowing	well	 that	he	can	safely	rely	upon	the
solid	reality	of	the	shield	as	much	as	upon	the	appropriateness	of	his
language	 to	 that	 reality.	 With	 Kafka	 there	 is,	 instead	 of	 such
equanimity,	 the	 nervous	 desire	 to	 obtain	 from	words	 the	 guarantee
that	“the	real”	has	still	some	validity	for	the	 inner	sense,	 that	 it	still
“counts.”

An	 “empty	 face	 that	 wore	 its	 emptiness	 openly”—this	 is	 how
Kafka’s	diary	describes	Felice	after	their	first	meeting.	Empty:	thus	it
offers	as	much	room	as	an	empty	page	to	the	expansive	imagination.
And	 indeed,	 this	 imagination	 instantly	 falls	 in	 love,	 and	before	 long
word-storms,	let	loose	in	Prague,	will	blow	around	the	beloved	empty
face	in	Berlin.	It	begins	on	September	20,	1912,	five	weeks	after	their
first	and,	for	the	time	being,	only	brief	meeting	in	the	midst	of	other
people,	and	begins	with	“My	dear	Fräulein	Bauer.”	This	letter,	rather
significantly,	 happens	 to	 coincide	with	 the	 onrush	 of	 that	 sustained
literary	 inspiration	 which,	 among	 other	 writings,	 produced	 “The
Judgment,”	written	two	days	later	in	the	eight	hours	of	one	night,	the
story	in	which	F.B.,	to	whom	it	is	dedicated,	lends	her	initials	to	the
equally	 “empty”	 figure	 of	 Frieda	 Brandenfeld,	 just	 as	 she	 will	 lend
them	later	to	Fräulein	Bürstner	in	The	Trial	and,	in	the	shortened	form
F.,	to	Frieda—Frieda	again!—in	The	Castle.	And	what	began	with	“My
dear	 Fräulein	 Bauer”	 rises,	 driven	 on	 by	 the	 imagination	 and	 the
written	word,	to	“Dear	Fräulein	Felice,”	and	“Dearest	Fräulein	Felice,”
and	ultimately	to	the	ecstatic	“Du”	of	November	14,	1912,	erupting	in
the	 letter	 that	 addresses	 her	 as	 “Dearest.”	 Yet	 this	 embrace	 by	 the



imagination	 and	 on	 paper	 is	 certainly	 no	 token	 of	 an	 early
rendezvous.	 When	 Felice	 suggests	 a	 Christmas	 meeting	 in	 the
“external	reality”	of	Berlin,	Kafka	refuses,	saying	that	he	must	use	the
few	free	days	for	his	writing.	And	this	he	does;	but	what	he	writes	is,
above	all,	letters	to	her.
This	 is	 the	 onset	 of	 those	 years	 filled	 with	 the	 agonies	 of	 the

struggle—not	the	struggle	for	this	woman	whom	he	could	have	taken
as	 his	wife	 at	 any	 time	 he	 chose	 if	 he	 truly	wanted	 a	 home	 in	 this
world,	but	the	struggle	for	the	“reality”	of	world,	marriage,	and	home.
It	is	moving	and	at	the	same	time	terrifying	to	watch	his	words—how,
in	 their	 entrancing	 dexterity	 and	 calculated	 helplessness,	 they	 woo
this	“reality”	of	hers,	those	fragments	of	reality	he	gathers	in	through
this	 correspondence,	 and	 how	 they	maintain	 the	 precarious	 state	 of
balance	between	 the	“real”	and	 the	“literary.”	And	all	 the	 time	 they
are	 on	 the	 verge	 of	 becoming	 literature	 themselves,	 indulging	 in
mythologizing,	 now	 abysmally	 sad	 and	 now	 again	 comical.	 In	 an
instant	Kafka	can	transform	the	real	pain	with	which	he	awaits,	often
in	 vain,	 Felice’s	 letters	 into	 the	 occasion	 for	 writing	 an	 enchanting
comedy	scene,	 in	which	his	office	 staff,	Mergl,	Wottawa,	and	Böhm,
appear	as	 three	comic	postillons	d’amour,	 all	 trained	by	him	 to	bring
him	with	the	utmost	haste	the	letters	arriving	from	Berlin.	Or,	having
urged	 Felice	 time	 and	 again	 to	 describe	 her	 every	 day	 in	 minute
particularity,	 he	 endows	 this	 or	 that	 triviality	 she	 reports	 with	 the
quality	of	a	mythic	moment:	 the	nocturnal	 signal,	 for	 instance,	with
which	she	announces	 to	her	mother	 that	 she	has	come	home.	Or	he
implores	 her	 to	 send	 him	 photographs,	 and	 more	 and	 more
photographs,	 this	 paper	 currency	 of	 “real”	 moments	 ever	 more
devalued	by	every	passing	hour;	and	as	soon	as	he	holds	them	in	his
hands,	he	loses	himself	in	the	intense	contemplation	of	those	shadow
appearances	 which,	 like	 the	 face	 in	 its	 outer	 emptiness,	 allow	 the
inner	gaze	 to	descend	 into	 the	depths	of	 the	 imagination	and	at	 the
same	 time	maintain	 the	 illusion	 that	 its	 attention	 is	 fixed	 upon	 the
reality	 of	 what	 is	 so	 “realistically”	 depicted.	 And	 he	 studies	 these
mechanical	 reproductions	 as	 if	 they	 were	 all	 veiled	 images	 of	 a
goddess,	vaguely	promising	that	one	day	she	might	reveal	herself	and,
with	herself,	the	mystery	of	the	meaning	of	the	world.	Or	the	subject
of	the	correspondence	is	the	“reality,”	menacingly	approaching,	of	the
marriage	 quarters	 and	 the	 question	 of	 how	 to	 furnish	 them;	 and
momentarily	the	sumptuous	stuff	she	purchases	turns	into	a	brood	of
dragons	 obstructing	 the	 knight’s	 progress	 toward	 his	 beloved.



Everything	 he	 does	 comes	 to	 the	 same:	 it	 perfectly	 succeeds	 as
literature,	 and	 perfectly	 fails	 in	 coming	 to	 grips	 with	 the	 “real”
situation.
Only	once	do	these	letters	fill	themselves	with	more	“reality”:	after
their	 stay	 in	Marienbad	 during	 the	 summer	 of	 1916.	 At	 about	 that
time	 a	 Jewish	 People’s	 Home	 had	 been	 founded	 in	 Berlin;	 Felice
helped	there	in	looking	after	refugees,	particularly	the	children,	from
Eastern	 Europe,	 and	 Kafka	 immersed	 himself	 in	 her	 pedagogical
problems,	 encouraged	 and	 counseled	 her,	 recommended	 reading
matter	 for	her	or	her	pupils,	sent	her	parcels	of	books,	and	attended
with	 sagacity	 and	 common	 sense	 to	 the	 “real.”	 The	 first	 contact—
indeed,	through	her	activity,	not	his—with	a	“real,”	even	a	social	and
national,	effort	that	struck	him	as	good	and	sensible	calmed	his	mind
for	a	while,	although	he	told	her	in	his	letter	of	September	12,	1916,
that	on	examination	it	would	become	clear	that	he	was	not	a	Zionist.
This	was	probably	due	to	his	suspicion	that	the	“normalization”	of	the
Jews	 in	 a	 national	 state	 would	 endanger	 exactly	 that	 which	 he
regarded	as	the	most	valuable	Jewish	quality,	found	above	all	among
East	European	Jews:	a	particular	kind	of	religiousness	and	spirituality,
something	 that	 was	 “unreal,”	 but	 unreal	 in	 a—for	 once—positive
sense.	 Be	 this	 as	 it	 may,	 the	 time	 in	 which	 it	 seemed	 that	 he	 and
Felice	might	found	their	life	together	upon	something	“real”	was	very
brief.	His	anxieties	returned	and	were,	if	anything,	more	intense	than
before.	 Despite	 this,	 there	 was	 the	 second	 engagement.	 Yet	 soon
afterwards	 Kafka	 suffered	 the	 hemorrhage,	 symptom	 of	 the	 disease
from	which,	as	he	knew,	he	would	never	 recover.	For	 the	blood	did
not	simply	come	from	the	sick	lung,	but	from	the	wound	that	one	of
the	two	enemies	fighting	within	him	had	inflicted	upon	the	other.
One	of	 the	two	enemies.	Which	one?	No	doubt	 the	“real”	one,	 for
Kafka	really	died	of	 this	wound.	 It	would	nonetheless	be	rash	to	say
that	 “reality”	 proved	 stronger	 in	 the	 end	 than	 literature—or	 that	 to
which,	 following	 Kafka’s	 usage,	we	 have	 given	 the	modest	 name	 of
“literature.”	 For	 the	 truth	 is	 that	 literature	 for	 him	 was	 not	 just
literature;	 despite	 the	 devilish	 suspicions	 he	 indefatigably	 uttered
against	 it,	 it	 remained	 the	 only	 means	 by	 which	 he	 tried	 to	 give
perfect	form	and	shape	to	a	life	that,	after	all,	did	not	quite	reject	the
demand	 for	 meaning,	 or	 at	 least	 allowed	 meaning	 faintly	 to	 shine
from	the	depth	through	layers	and	layers	of	the	meaningless	that	had
all	but	covered	it	up.	Indeed,	Kafka	is	not	altogether	wrong	in	saying
to	Felice	that	he	is	nothing	but	literature—“real”	literature.	For	almost



everything	 he	 has	 written	 possesses	 the	 indisputable	 “reality”	 and
“being”	that	are	rare	in	modern	writing	and	transcend	most	“realities”
of	the	age.	In	this	sense	too	these	letters	are,	like	himself,	“literature.”
There	is	about	them	nothing	that	is	mere	whim	or	caprice—nothing	of
the	kind	of	 privacy	 that	makes	 the	publication	of	many	an	 intimate
correspondence	painful	and	forbidden.	And	they	have	this	in	common
with	 the	 songs	 of	 the	 minnesingers:	 that	 she	 to	 whom	 they	 are
addressed	is	not	“really”	being	courted.
In	this	century	 it	 is	certainly	 too	much	to	expect	 that	 these	 letters
will	 inspire	 some	 readers	 to	 study	 the	 poetry	 of	 the	 minnesingers
rather	than	to	recite	Freudian	theorems,	long	since	learned	by	heart.
Indeed,	it	is	to	be	feared	that,	for	instance,	Kafka	Senior,	whom	Franz
himself	 is	 likely	 to	 have	 done	 some	 injustice,	 will	 lose	 his	 once	 so
overpowering	 personality	 altogether,	 assuming	 instead	 the	 role	 of	 a
theoretical	 superego	 or	 turning	 into	 a	 kind	 of	 Old	 Prague	 ghost	 of
King	Laios,	 father	of	Oedipus,	as	 soon	as	 it	becomes	known	 that	his
son	wrote	to	Felice	(on	August	30,	1913)	that	it	was	not	“facts”	that
prevented	 him	 from	 making	 her	 and	 himself	 happy,	 but	 “an
insurmountable	 fear,	 fear	 of	 achieving	 happiness,	 a	 desire	 and	 a
command	 to	 torment	 myself	 for	 some	 higher	 purpose.”	 And	 people
will	cry	“impotence”	upon	reading,	in	the	letter	of	July	10,	1913,	that
the	obstacle	to	their	marriage	was	his	“dread	of	the	union	even	with
the	 most	 beloved	 woman.”	 They	 will	 know	 much	 better	 than	 the
writer	 himself	 what	 was	 the	 cause	 of	 this	 “unappeasable
apprehension”;	 for	 he	 himself	 accepted	 this	 anxiety	 as	 if	 it	were	 “a
command	from	heaven.”
A	 command	 from	 heaven:	 to	 feel	 this	 in	 a	 world	 that	 serves	 its
citizens	 with	 very	 different,	 and	 apparently	 more	 dependable,
information	about	the	discomfort	of	their	souls—might	this	not	justify
a	 little	 the	misfortune	of	 this	 love?	Even,	perhaps,	 justify	 the	misery
that	Kafka	must	have	caused	Felice?	Had	he	been	born	 in	Provence,
not	 in	 Prague,	 and	not	 toward	 the	 end	 of	 the	 nineteenth	 but	 in	 the
eleventh	century,	he	might	have	become	a	Duke	of	Aquitaine,	one	of
the	first	poets	who	spoke	and	sang	of	a	love,	a	minne,	that	desired	no
consummation	 but	 meant	 the	 faithful	 hope	 of	 transcendent	 yet	 not
unreal	bliss.
Love	letters?	On	February	12,	1922,	Kafka	entered	in	his	diary	that
he	had	never	known	in	himself	the	words	“I	love	you,”	but	only	“the
expectant	 stillness	 that	 should	have	been	broken	by	my	 ‘I	 love	you,’
that	is	all	I	have	known,	nothing	more.”	It	is	the	languid	minnesong	of



a	poet	to	whom,	because	there	is	no	God,	even	love	denies	itself—or
whose	love	is	so	irresistibly	drawn	into	the	empty	upper	spheres	that
it	misses	its	earthly	assignation	with	the	beloved,	just	as	Kafka,	in	the
astonishingly	 precise	 fantasies	 he	 records	 in	 his	 New	 Year	 1912–13
letter,	misses	his	appointment	with	Felice.



Editors’	Note
In	1955	Schocken	Books	acquired	 from	Felice	Bauer	Franz	Kafka’s
letters	addressed	to	her.	She	also	handed	over	to	the	publishers	those
of	Kafka’s	letters	to	her	friend	Grete	Bloch	that	were	in	her	possession.
This	part	of	the	correspondence—about	half	the	letters	from	Kafka	to
Grete	Bloch	 published	here—was	 given	 to	 her	 by	Grete	Bloch	when
the	latter	emigrated	from	Germany	in	1935.	The	remaining	letters	to
Grete	 Bloch	 were	 deposited	 by	 the	 recipient	 with	 her	 lawyer	 in
Florence	 at	 a	 later	 date.	 It	 was	 he	 who	 placed	 photostats	 of	 these
letters	at	the	disposal	of	Max	Brod,	and	through	Max	Brod	this	part	of
the	 correspondence	 finally	 came	 into	 the	 possession	 of	 Schocken
Books.
The	 editors	 decided	 to	 incorporate	 in	 chronological	 order	 Kafka’s
letters	 to	Grete	 Bloch,	 as	well	 as	 letters	 concerning	 the	 engagement
written	 by	members	 of	 Kafka’s	 family	 and	 friends	 and	 preserved	 by
Felice;	 they	form	part	of	 the	history	of	 this	relationship,	and	help	to
convey	 a	 more	 accurate	 picture	 of	 Kafka’s	 situation	 at	 that	 time.
Biographical	 notes	 on	 Felice	 Bauer	 and	 Grete	 Bloch	 are	 included;
other	people	mentioned	in	the	correspondence	are	identified	in	notes.
All	 letters	 to	Felice	Bauer	and	Grete	Bloch,	where	 the	originals	or
copies	are	in	the	possession	of	Schocken	Books,	have	been	included	in
this	edition	and	printed	in	full.
The	editors	had	access	to	all	letters	in	the	original.	The	majority	are
in	Kafka’s	handwriting;	the	others	are	typed.	It	 is	apparent	from	this
correspondence	that	not	all	of	Kafka’s	letters	to	Felice	have	survived;
from	 references	 in	 the	 text	 it	 is	 clear	 that	 a	 number	 of	 letters	 and
postcards	 are	 missing.	 Unlike	 Kafka’s	 letters	 to	 Felice	 Bauer,	 which
were	in	perfect	condition,	twelve	of	those	to	Grete	Bloch	had	been	cut
to	pieces	in	a	peculiar	way;	however,	with	one	exception,	it	has	been
possible	to	reconstruct	these	letters,	although	parts	of	them	had	been
in	 two	different	 places	 for	 years	 on	 end—one	 lot	with	 Felice	Bauer,
the	other	with	Grete	Bloch’s	lawyer.
The	 context	 shows	 that	 some	 of	 Kafka’s	 letters	 were	 undated.	 In
these	cases	an	attempt	has	been	made	to	ascertain	the	probable	date.
As	 in	 all	 other	 additions	 by	 the	 editors,	 such	 dates	 are	 printed	 in



square	brackets.
Felice’s	letters	to	Kafka	have	evidently	not	survived.

E.H.	J.B.				



	
Felice	Bauer	was	born	in	Neustadt,	Upper	Silesia,	on	November	18,
1887.	 She	 had	 four	 brothers	 and	 sisters:	 Elisabeth	 (Else),	 Erna,
Antonie	 (Toni),	 and	Ferdinand	 (Ferry).	Erna,	under	 the	abbreviation
E.,	appears	many	times	in	Kafka’s	diaries,	especially	during	the	second
half	of	1914—i.e.,	after	the	breaking-off	of	his	engagement	to	Felice.
Her	 father,	who	 came	 from	Vienna,	married	 the	 daughter	 of	 a	 dyer
living	 in	Neustadt.	 In	1899—when	Felice	was	12—the	family	moved
from	the	small	town	in	Silesia	to	Berlin,	where	her	father	worked	as
an	agent	for	a	foreign	insurance	company.	For	six	years,	from	1904	to
1910,	Felice’s	parents	lived	apart,	and	Felice	was	anxious	to	help	her
mother	to	support	the	family.	Thus,	after	leaving	school	in	1908,	she
started	work	as	a	 shorthand-typist	with	 the	gramophone	 record	 firm
of	 Odeon;	 in	 1909	 she	 moved	 to	 the	 firm	 of	 Carl	 Lindström	 A.G.,
manufacturers	of	dictating	machines	and	Parlographs.	Within	a	short
time	she	was	promoted	to	executive	secretary.
Until	March	1913	the	Bauers	lived	on	Immanuelkirchstrasse,	a	quiet
but	 not	 particularly	 attractive	 street	 in	 Berlin’s	 East	 End.	 Then	 they
moved	to	Wilmersdorferstrasse	which	at	that	time	was	part	of	one	of
the	smarter	residential	areas	of	Berlin’s	West	End.	Felice’s	father	died
in	November	1914.
In	 September	 1916,	 encouraged	 by	 Kafka,	 Felice	 volunteered	 for
work	in	the	Jewish	People’s	Home	in	Berlin,	a	center	for	Jewish	relief
work	founded	by	Siegfried	Lehmann	in	May	of	that	year	and	situated
near	the	Alexanderplatz,	a	section	of	Berlin	largely	inhabited	by	East
European	Jews,	both	war	refugees	and	immigrants.	Max	Brod,	Martin
Buber,	and	Gustav	Landauer	were	among	its	supporters.	The	purpose
of	the	Home	was	the	cultural	and	religious	education	of	the	children
and	young	people	 from	these	 families,	 some	of	whom	were	 living	 in
extremely	reduced	circumstances.	The	teachers,	the	so-called	helpers,
in	 the	Home	were	drawn	 from	among	 students,	 young	businessmen,
and	 women	 of	 the	 Jewish	 religious	 community.	 Although	 many	 of
them	 came	 from	 well-to-do	 backgrounds	 in	 the	 West	 End,	 they	 all
dressed	 very	 simply	 so	 that	 their	 pupils	 should	 not	 be	 conscious	 of
social	differences.
Felice,	who	devoted	her	 free	 time	to	 this	 social	work,	was	held	 in
high	esteem	by	her	fellow	helpers.	She	was	very	popular	with	young
people	(she	taught	a	class	of	girls).	From	Prague,	Franz	Kafka	gave	her
advice	 on	 her	 new	 occupation;	 he	 recommended	 and	 supplied	 her



with	educational	literature	for	her	own	use,	as	well	as	reading	matter
for	her	pupils.	 In	 fact	he	 followed	 the	work	of	 the	Home	with	keen
attention.
All	 testimonials	 and	 reports	 on	 Felice	 Bauer	 emphasize	 her

efficiency	and	common	sense	in	practical	matters—qualities	which,	as
Kafka	says,	he	himself	 lacked	entirely,	and	which	throughout	his	life
he	 often	 admired	 extravagantly	 in	 others,	 not	 least	 in	 Felice	 and
subsequently	in	Grete	Bloch,	who	was	to	play	such	an	important	role
in	his	relationship	with	Felice.	Felice	appears	to	have	been	a	positive,
uncomplicated	person.	Kafka	once	described	her	as	“a	happy,	healthy,
self-confident	 girl.”	 She	 liked	 pretty	 clothes,	 enjoyed	 traveling,	 but
was	prepared	to	sacrifice	much	for	the	sake	of	helping	her	family.	Her
taste	in	literature,	art,	and	furnishing	was	that	of	the	middle	classes	of
her	 time.	 She	 evidently	 had	 little	 understanding	 for	 Kafka’s	 literary
work.
In	March	1919,	 fifteen	months	 after	 her	 final	 parting	 from	Kafka,

Felice	married	a	well-to-do	Berlin	businessman.	Of	this	marriage	there
were	two	children,	a	son	and	a	daughter.	That	Kafka	knew	of	the	birth
of	these	children	is	clear	from	his	letters	to	Milena	Jesenská	and	Max
Brod.
In	1931	Felice	and	her	family	moved	to	Switzerland,	and	in	1936	to

the	United	States,	where	she	died	on	October	15,	1960.



[LETTERHEAD:	Workers’	Accident	Insurance	Institute]
Prague,	September	20,	1912

My	dear	Fräulein	Bauer,
In	 the	 likelihood	 that	 you	 no	 longer	 have	 even	 the	 remotest
recollection	 of	me,	 I	 am	 introducing	myself	 once	more:	my	name	 is
Franz	Kafka,	and	I	am	the	person	who	greeted	you	for	the	first	 time
that	evening	at	Director	Brod’s1	in	Prague,	the	one	who	subsequently
handed	 you	 across	 the	 table,	 one	 by	 one,	 photographs	 of	 a	 Thalia
trip,2	and	who	finally,	with	the	very	hand	now	striking	the	keys,	held
your	 hand,	 the	 one	 which	 confirmed	 a	 promise	 to	 accompany	 him
next	year	to	Palestine.
Now,	 if	 you	 still	 wish	 to	 undertake	 this	 journey—you	 said	 at	 the
time	you	are	not	fickle,	and	I	saw	no	signs	of	it	in	you—then	it	will	be
not	 only	 right	 but	 absolutely	 essential	 for	 us	 to	 start	 discussing	 this
journey	at	once.	For	we	shall	have	to	make	use	of	every	minute	of	our
holiday,	 which	 in	 any	 case	 is	 far	 too	 short,	 especially	 for	 a	 trip	 to
Palestine,	 and	 this	 we	 can	 do	 only	 by	 preparing	 ourselves	 as
thoroughly	as	possible	and	by	agreeing	on	all	preparations.
One	thing	I	have	to	confess,	bad	as	 it	sounds,	and	ill	as	 it	accords
with	what	 I	 have	 just	 said:	 I	 am	an	 erratic	 letter	writer.	Yes,	 and	 it
would	 be	 worse	 still	 if	 I	 didn’t	 have	 a	 typewriter;	 for	 if	 my	 mood
doesn’t	happen	to	feel	equal	to	a	letter,	there	are	still	my	fingertips	to
do	 the	 writing.	 On	 the	 other	 hand,	 I	 never	 expect	 a	 letter	 to	 be
answered	by	 return;	even	when	awaiting	a	 letter	day	after	day	with
renewed	anticipation,	I	am	never	disappointed	when	it	doesn’t	come,
and	when	finally	it	does	come,	I	incline	to	be	startled.	While	inserting
a	new	sheet	of	paper,	I	realize	that	I	may	have	described	myself	as	far
more	difficult	 than	 I	am.	 If	 I	have	made	 this	mistake	 it	would	 serve
me	right,	for	why	do	I	choose	to	write	this	letter	after	six	hours	in	the
office,	and	on	a	typewriter	I	am	not	used	to.
And	 yet,	 and	 yet—the	 only	 disadvantage	 of	 using	 a	 typewriter	 is
that	 one	 easily	 loses	 the	 thread—if	 doubts	 were	 raised,	 practical
doubts	 I	mean,	 about	 choosing	me	as	 a	 traveling	 companion,	 guide,
encumbrance,	 tyrant,	 or	 whatever	 else	 I	 might	 turn	 into,	 there
shouldn’t	be	any	prior	objections	 to	me	as	a	correspondent—and	for
the	time	being	this	is	the	only	thing	at	issue—and	as	such,	you	might
well	give	me	a	trial.



Yours	very	sincerely,	Dr.	Franz	Kafka
Pořič	7,	Prague

[LETTERHEAD:	Workers’	Accident	Insurance	Institute]
Prague,	September	28,	1912

My	dear	Fräulein	Bauer,	forgive	me	for	not	using	the	typewriter,	but	I
have	 such	 an	 enormous	 amount	 to	 tell	 you,	 and	 the	 typewriter	 is
outside	 in	 the	 corridor;	 besides,	 this	 letter	 strikes	 me	 as	 so	 urgent;
also,	 today	 is	 a	 holiday3	 here	 in	 Bohemia	 (which	 strictly	 speaking
doesn’t	belong	to	the	above	apology);	the	typewriter	doesn’t	write	fast
enough	 for	 my	 liking;	 the	 weather	 is	 lovely,	 warm,	 the	 window	 is
open	(but	my	windows	are	always	open),	and	I	did	something	I	hadn’t
done	for	a	long	time,	I	arrived	in	the	office	humming;	and	if	I	hadn’t
come	to	get	your	letter,	I	really	don’t	know	why	I	should	have	come
to	the	office	at	all	on	this	holiday.
How	did	I	get	your	address?	When	you	ask	that	question,	that’s	not

the	 question	 you	 are	 asking.	 I	 just	managed	 to	 cadge	 your	 address.
First	I	got	the	name	of	some	corporation,	but	I	didn’t	like	that.	Then	I
was	 given	 the	 address	 of	 your	 apartment	 without	 the	 number,	 and
eventually	 the	 number	 as	 well.	 Now	 I	 was	 satisfied,	 and	 of	 course
didn’t	 write,	 for	 I	 considered	 the	 address	 as	 something	 in	 itself;
besides,	 I	 was	 afraid	 the	 address	 might	 be	 wrong,	 for	 who	 was
Immanuel	 Kirch?	 And	 nothing	 is	 sadder	 than	 sending	 a	 letter	 to	 a
doubtful	address;	 that’s	no	 letter,	 it’s	more	 like	a	sigh.	Then,	when	I
discovered	 that	 there	 is	 an	 Immanuel	Church	 in	your	 street,	 all	was
well	again	for	a	while.	But	in	addition	to	your	address	I	would	have
liked	 to	 have	 some	 indication	 of	 the	 compass	 point,	 since	 a	 Berlin
address	always	has	it.	I	for	my	part	would	like	to	have	placed	you	in
the	North,	although	I	believe	this	is	a	poor	district.
But	apart	 from	this	worry	over	addresses	(in	Prague	 it	 is	not	even

known	whether	you	live	at	No.	20	or	30),	how	much	did	my	wretched
letter	have	to	suffer	before	it	was	written!	Now	that	the	door	between
us	is	beginning	to	move,	or	at	 least	we	are	both	holding	the	handle,
surely	 I	 can,	 in	 fact	 I	 even	must,	 say	 it.	 Oh,	 the	 moods	 I	 get	 into,
Fräulein	 Bauer!	 A	 hail	 of	 nervousness	 pours	 down	 upon	 me
continuously.	What	I	want	one	minute	I	don’t	want	the	next.	When	I
have	reached	the	top	of	the	stairs,	I	still	don’t	know	the	state	I	shall	be
in	when	I	enter	the	apartment.	I	have	to	pile	up	uncertainties	within



myself	before	 they	 turn	 into	a	 little	certainty	or	a	 letter.	How	many
evenings—to	 avoid	 exaggeration	 I’ll	 say	 10—did	 I	 spend	 composing
that	first	letter	before	going	to	sleep!	Now	it	is	one	of	my	failings	that
I	 cannot	 write	 down	 automatically	 anything	 I	 have	 put	 together
beforehand.	My	memory	 is	very	bad,	but	even	 the	best	of	memories
could	not	help	me	 to	write	down	accurately	even	a	 short	paragraph
which	 I	 have	 thought	 out	 in	 advance	 and	 tried	 to	 memorize;	 for
within	 each	 sentence	 there	 are	 transitions	 that	 have	 to	 remain	 in
suspense	before	it	is	written	down.	Then,	when	I	sit	down	to	write	the
memorized	 sentence,	 I	 see	 nothing	 but	 fragments	 lying	 about;	 I	 can
see	neither	through	them	nor	beyond	them,	and	the	only	thing	to	do
would	be	to	throw	away	my	pen,	if	my	half	heartedness	would	let	me.
Nevertheless	 I	 did	 ponder	 over	 that	 letter,	 for	 I	 had	 by	 no	 means
decided	to	write	it,	and	of	course	these	ponderings	are	the	best	way	to
prevent	me	from	writing.	 I	remember	that	 I	once	actually	got	out	of
bed	 to	write	 down	what	 I	 had	 thought	 out	 for	 you;	 but	 I	 promptly
returned	to	bed,	because—and	this	is	my	second	failing—I	reproached
myself	 for	 the	 foolishness	of	my	anxiety,	and	decided	that	what	was
so	clear	 in	my	head	could	 just	as	well	be	committed	to	paper	 in	 the
morning.	Around	midnight	such	decisions	always	win	out.
But	if	I	go	on	like	this	I’ll	never	get	anywhere.	I	am	chattering	about

my	 last	 letter	 instead	 of	 telling	 you	 all	 I	 have	 to	 say.	 Please
understand	why	that	first	letter	has	assumed	such	importance	for	me.
It	is	because	you	answered	it	with	the	letter	that	lies	here	beside	me,
which	has	made	me	absurdly	happy	and	upon	which	I	am	now	laying
my	hand	 to	be	 conscious	of	owning	 it.	Please	write	me	another	one
soon.	Don’t	make	an	effort,	a	letter	requires	effort,	however	one	looks
at	it;	just	keep	a	little	diary	for	me;	this	demands	less	and	gives	more.
Of	 course	 you	 will	 have	 to	 write	 more	 in	 it	 than	 you	 would	 for
yourself	alone,	since	I	don’t	really	know	you	at	all.	You	must	record,
for	 instance,	 at	 what	 time	 you	 get	 to	 the	 office,	 what	 you	 had	 for
breakfast,	what	you	see	from	your	office	window,	what	kind	of	work
you	do	there,	the	names	of	your	male	and	female	friends,	why	you	get
presents,	who	 tries	 to	 undermine	 your	 health	 by	 giving	 you	 sweets,
and	 the	 thousand	 things	of	whose	existence	and	possibilities	 I	 know
nothing.—But	oh,	what	has	happened	to	the	trip	to	Palestine?	In	the
near	 future,	or	 the	not	 so	near	 future,	by	next	 spring	or	autumn	 for
certain.—Max’s	operetta4	 is	now	dormant;	he	is	in	Italy,	but	soon	he
will	 thrust	 upon	your	Germany	an	 enormous	 literary	 yearbook.5	My
book,	booklet,	pamphlet	has	been	accepted	at	last.6	But	it	is	not	very



good;	better	things	will	have	to	be	written.	And	with	this	verdict	I	bid
you	farewell!

Yours,	Franz	Kafka

October	13,	1912
Dear	Fräulein	Bauer,
Fifteen	days	ago,	at	10	o’clock	in	the	morning,	I	received	your	first

letter,	and	a	few	minutes	later	I	sat	down	and	wrote	you	four	pages	of
enormous	size.7	 I	don’t	regret	 it,	 for	 I	could	not	have	spent	the	time
with	greater	pleasure,	and	my	only	regret	is	that	when	I	had	finished	I
had	made	but	a	very	small	beginning	of	what	I	wanted	to	say,	so	that
the	 suppressed	part	of	 the	 letter	preoccupied	me	 for	days	and	made
me	restless,	until	this	restlessness	was	replaced	by	the	anticipation	of
your	reply	and	the	gradual	waning	of	this	anticipation.
But	why	haven’t	 you	written	 to	me?—It	 is	 possible,	 and	 from	 the

manner	of	that	letter	even	probable,	that	there	was	something	foolish
in	 it	 that	may	have	disconcerted	you,	 but	 it	 is	 not	 possible	 that	 the
good	 intention	 behind	 my	 every	 word	 could	 have	 escaped	 you.—
Could	a	letter	have	gone	astray?	But	mine	was	mailed	with	too	great
an	eagerness	for	it	to	have	missed	its	aim,	while	yours	was	too	eagerly
awaited.	 And	 do	 letters	 really	 get	 lost	 except	 in	 the	 mind	 of	 one
waiting	for	them	and	unable	to	find	another	explanation?—Could	my
letter	possibly	have	been	kept	from	you	because	of	the	frowned-upon
trip	 to	Palestine?	But	can	 this	 really	happen	within	a	 family,	and	 to
you	of	all	people?	And	according	to	my	calculations	the	letter	should
have	 arrived	 on	 Sunday	 morning.—So	 there	 remains	 only	 the	 sad
possibility	 that	you	are	 ill.	But	 this	 I	do	not	believe.	Surely,	you	are
healthy	and	cheerful.—But	then	my	reason	fails	me,	and	I	write	this
letter	not	so	much	in	the	hope	of	a	reply	as	to	discharge	a	duty	toward
myself.
If	I	were	the	Immanuelkirchstrasse	mailman	delivering	this	letter	to

your	house,	I	wouldn’t	allow	myself	to	be	detained	by	any	astonished
member	of	your	family,	but	would	walk	straight	through	all	the	rooms
to	yours	and	put	the	letter	in	your	hands;	or,	better	still,	I	would	stand
outside	 your	 door	 and	 keep	 on	 ringing	 the	 bell	 for	 my	 pleasure,	 a
pleasure	that	would	relieve	all	tension!

Yours,	Franz	K.
Pořič	7,	Prague



To	Frau	Sophie	Friedmann8
October	14,	1912

Dear	Frau	Friedmann,
This	 evening,	 by	 chance	 and	 without	 actual	 permission—you

mustn’t	 be	 annoyed	 with	 me—I	 read	 in	 a	 letter	 to	 your	 parents	 a
remark	 to	 the	 effect	 that	 Fräulein	 Bauer	 and	 I	 are	 in	 lively
correspondence.	Since	 this	 is	only	partly	 true	but	on	 the	other	hand
would	be	very	much	 in	accordance	with	my	wishes,	 I	 ask	you,	dear
Frau	 Friedmann,	 to	 send	 me	 a	 few	 words	 to	 throw	 light	 on	 this
remark,	which	shouldn’t	be	difficult	since	you	and	Fräulein	Bauer	are
bound	to	be	in	touch	by	letter.
In	 fact,	 the	 correspondence	 you	 referred	 to	 as	 “lively”	 looks	 like

this:	approximately	two	months	after	the	evening	I	saw	Fräulein	Bauer
for	the	first	and	last	time	at	your	parents’	house,	I	wrote	her	a	letter
the	 contents	 of	 which	 are	 not	 worth	mentioning	 since	 it	 brought	 a
friendly	reply.	It	was	by	no	means	a	final	reply,	and	according	to	its
tone	 and	 content	 may	 well	 be	 considered	 as	 an	 introduction	 to	 a
possibly	more	 intimate	 correspondence	 at	 some	 future	 date.	 But	 the
interval	between	my	letter	and	the	reply	lasted	ten	days,	and	it	occurs
to	me	now	 that	 I	 should	have	 taken	 this	 hesitation,	 though	 in	 itself
not	overlong,	as	a	warning.	For	a	variety	of	reasons,	again	not	worth
mentioning—I	probably	mention	more	 than	enough	anyway	of	what
to	you,	dear	Frau	Friedmann,	 cannot	 seem	worth	mentioning—I	did
not	 do	 so;	 instead,	 immediately	 after	 reading	 that	 letter,	 a	 reading
that	 in	 some	 respects	may	have	been	 too	 cursory,	 I	wrote	my	 letter
which	to	many	eyes	may	have	had	the	inevitably	silly	characteristics
of	an	outburst.	Nevertheless	I	can	swear	that	while	admitting	that	all
objections	to	this	letter	are	justified,	the	objection	of	dishonesty	is	not
justified,	and	this	after	all	ought	 to	be	 the	decisive	 factor	 for	people
not	unfavorably	prejudiced	against	each	other.	Well,	since	that	letter
was	written,	sixteen	days	have	passed	without	my	having	received	a
reply	and	I	really	don’t	know	what	inducement	could	now	produce	a
belated	answer,	especially	since	that	particular	letter	was	one	of	those
that	are	brought	to	an	end	merely	to	create	a	speedy	opportunity	for	a
reply.	To	make	my	frankness	toward	you	absolute,	I	must	confess	that
during	these	sixteen	days	I	wrote,	but	did	not	send,	two	more	letters9
to	Fräulein	Bauer,	and	these	are	the	only	ones	that,	had	I	a	sense	of
humor,	would	permit	me	to	refer	to	a	lively	correspondence.	Indeed	I
might	at	first	have	believed	that	some	fortuitous	circumstances	could



perhaps	 have	 prevented	 a	 reply	 to	 that	 letter,	 or	 even	 made	 it
impossible,	but	having	considered	them	all	I	no	longer	believe	it	was
fortuitous	circumstances.
I	 certainly	 would	 not	 have	 dared	 to	 make	 this	 little	 confession,

either	 to	you,	dear	Frau	Friedmann,	or	 to	myself,	had	 I	not	been	 so
deeply	affected	by	that	remark	in	your	letter	and	had	I	not	known	that
this	 very	 letter,	 the	 contents	 of	 which	 are	 nothing	 to	 be	 proud	 of,
would	fall	into	good	and	skillful	hands.
With	kind	regards	to	you	and	your	husband,

yours	sincerely,	Franz	Kafka
Pořič	7,	Prague

To	Frau	Sophie	Friedmann
[LETTERHEAD:	Workers’	Accident	Insurance	Institute]

October	18,	1912
Dear	Frau	Friedmann,
The	office	has	to	take	second	place	in	importance	compared	to	this

letter	 in	reply	 to	yours	of	 the	16th	which,	 insofar	as	 it	 is	written	by
you,	 is	 as	 good,	 kind,	 and	 clear	 as	 I	 expected,	 while	 the	 quoted
passage	 remains	a	puzzle	even	at	 the	 tenth	 reading.	So	your	 remark
about	 a	 “lively	 correspondence”	was	not	made	 casually	 and	without
proof	as	I,	to	my	shame,	imagined—though	without	admitting	it	in	my
last	 letter,	since	 in	that	case	 it	would	have	become	superfluous.	And
this	lively	correspondence	is	really	supposed	to	have	been	in	existence
on	 the	 3rd	 or	 at	 the	 earliest	 on	 the	 2nd	 of	October,	 thus	 at	 a	 time
when	 my	 second	 unanswered,	 ill-fated	 letter	 must	 definitely	 have
reached	Berlin.	Could	a	reply	have	been	written	after	all?	For	surely
the	quoted	passage	 is	 an	 admission	of	 the	knowledge	of	 that	 letter?
But	are	letters	ever	actually	lost	except	in	the	uncertain	expectation	of
one	who	can	find	no	other	explanation?	You	have	to	admit,	dear	Frau
Friedmann,	that	I	was	right	to	write	to	you,	and	that	this	is	a	matter
that	calls	for	the	assistance	of	a	good	angel.
With	kindest	regards	to	you	and	your	husband.

Your	indebted	Franz	K.

[LETTERHEAD:	Workers’	Accident	Insurance	Institute]
October	23,	1912



Dear	Fräulein	Bauer,
And	even	if	all	three	of	my	directors	were	to	stand	around	my	table

looking	straight	down	my	pen,	I	would	have	to	write	to	you	at	once,
for	your	letter	has	descended	upon	me	as	from	the	clouds,	to	which	I
have	 been	 gazing	 up	 in	 vain	 for	 three	 weeks.	 (At	 this	 moment	 my
wish	concerning	my	immediate	superior	is	being	fulfilled.)	If	I	am	to
answer	the	description	of	your	life	during	that	time	with	a	comparable
one,	I	must	tell	you	that	half	my	life	was	spent	waiting	for	your	letter,
which	 waiting	 also	 includes	 the	 three	 short	 letters	 I	 wrote	 to	 you
during	those	three	weeks	(I	am	just	being	questioned	about	insurance
for	 convicts,	my	God!)	 of	which	 two	 could	 now	 perhaps	 be	mailed,
while	 the	 third,	 actually	 the	 first,	 cannot	 possibly	 go.	 And	 so	 your
letter	 is	 presumably	 lost	 (I	 have	 just	 had	 to	 explain	 that	 I	 know
nothing	about	a	ministerial	appeal	by	Josef	Wagner	in	Katharinaberg)
and	I	won’t	get	any	answers	to	my	earlier	questions,	 though	I	am	in
no	way	to	blame	for	the	loss.
I	am	restless	and	cannot	pull	myself	together;	I	am	in	the	mood	for

continual	and,	as	it	were,	circular	complaining,	although	today	is	no
longer	 yesterday;	 but	 the	 accumulation	 will	 overflow	 and	 liberate
itself	into	better	days.
What	 I	 am	writing	 today	 is	 not	 an	 answer	 to	 your	 letter;	 perhaps

that	 answer	 shall	 be	 in	 tomorrow’s	 letter,	 possibly	 not	 until	 the
following	day’s.	My	manner	of	writing	is	of	course	not	crazy	in	itself,
but	 just	as	crazy	as	my	present	way	of	 life,	which	 I	may	describe	 to
you	one	of	these	days.
And	you	are	always	being	given	presents!	These	books,	chocolates,

and	flowers	are	spread	all	over	your	office	desk?	On	my	table	there	is
nothing	 but	 wild	 disorder,	 and	 your	 flower,	 for	 which	 I	 kiss	 your
hand,	I	quickly	tucked	into	my	wallet	which,	in	spite	of	the	lost	and
unreplaced	letter,	already	contains	two	more	of	yours,	because	I	asked
Max	 to	give	me	your	 letter	 to	him,	which	may	be	 rather	 ridiculous,
but	otherwise	need	not	be	held	against	me.
This	 early	 mishap	 in	 our	 correspondence	 may	 have	 been	 quite	 a

good	 thing;	 at	 least	 I	 now	 know	 that,	 even	 if	 letters	 get	 lost,	 I	 am
allowed	 to	write	 to	 you.	 But	 this	must	 be	 the	 end	 to	 letters	 getting
lost.—Farewell,	and	think	about	a	short	diary.

Yours,	Franz	K.

[AT	THE	TOP	OF	THE	FIRST	PAGE]	I	am	so	nervous	about	possible	further	loss	of



letters,	 and	 you	 haven’t	 got	my	 address	 quite	 right;	 it	 should	 be:
Pořič	7	with	 two	hooks,	on	the	r	and	the	c,	and	to	be	on	the	safe
side	the	Workers’	Accident	Insurance	Institute	should	be	added.
I	will	let	you	know	the	date	of	Frau	Sophie’s	birthday	tomorrow.

[LETTERHEAD:	Workers’	Accident	Insurance	Institute]
October	24,	1912

Dear	Fräulein	Bauer,
What	 a	 thoroughly	 sleepless	 night	 that	was;	 only	 toward	 the	 end,

during	 the	 last	 two	 hours,	 one	 manages	 to	 twist	 oneself	 into	 an
enforced,	premeditated	sleep	in	which	dreams	are	not	real	dreams	and
sleep	even	less	like	real	sleep.	And	then,	as	if	that	weren’t	enough,	I
collided	with	a	butcher	boy’s	tray	outside	the	front	door,	and	can	still
feel	the	wood	above	my	left	eye.
Undoubtedly	 these	preparations	will	not	help	me	 to	overcome	 the

difficulties	which	writing	 to	you	creates,	 and	which	again	 last	night
kept	 passing	 through	my	 head	 in	 ever-changing	 forms.	 They	 do	 not
consist	of	an	inability	to	write	what	I	want	to	say,	which	are	but	the
simplest	 things,	 but	 there	 are	 so	 many	 of	 them	 that	 I	 cannot
accommodate	them	in	either	time	or	space.	In	recognition	of	this	fact
there	 are	 times—although	 only	 at	 night—when	 I	 long	 to	 drop
everything,	 stop	 writing,	 and	 perish	 by	 not	 writing	 rather	 than	 by
writing.
You	talk	about	your	visits	to	the	theater	and	this	interests	me	very

much,	 firstly	 because	 there	 in	 Berlin	 you	 are	 at	 the	 hub	 of	 all
theatrical	 events,	 secondly	 because	 your	 choice	 of	 theaters	 is	 very
good	 (except	 for	 the	 Metropol,	 which	 I	 too	 have	 attended	 with	 a
yawning	of	my	whole	being,	a	yawn	wider	than	the	entire	stage),	and
thirdly	because	I	myself	know	nothing	whatever	about	the	theatre.	On
the	other	hand,	what	good	does	it	do	me	to	learn	about	your	visits	to
the	theater	if	I	don’t	know	everything	that	happened	before	and	after,
if	 I	don’t	know	what	you	wore,	which	day	of	 the	week	 it	was,	what
the	weather	was	 like,	whether	you	dined	before	or	after,	where	you
sat,	 in	what	 kind	 of	mood	 you	were	 and	why,	 and	 so	 on,	 as	 far	 as
thought	can	reach.	Of	course	it	is	impossible	to	tell	me	everything,	but
then	everything	is	impossible.
In	order	to	write	something	that	is	completely	communicable:	Frau

Sophie’s	 birthday	 is	 not	 until	 March	 18th;	 and,	 to	 ask	 a	 direct



question,	when	is	yours?
It	 is	 not	 only	 the	 restlessness	 of	 the	 office	 which	makes	me	 leap

from	 one	 subject	 to	 another	 so	 that	 I	 now	 ask	 a	 very	 different
question:	I	remember	more	or	less	everything	you	said	that	evening	in
Prague,	so	far	as	one	can	trust	such	convictions;	but	one	thing	is	not
quite	clear	to	me,	as	I	realize	on	reading	your	letter,	and	I	would	like
you	to	fill	this	gap.	To	tell	the	truth,	while	we	were	walking	from	the
apartment	to	the	hotel	with	Director	Brod,	I	was	altogether	distracted,
inattentive,	and	bored—not	 that	 this	had	anything	 to	do,	 so	 far	as	 I
know,	with	Director	Brod’s	presence.	On	the	contrary,	I	was	relatively
content	to	feel	I	was	being	left	alone.	There	was	some	talk	of	your	not
mingling	with	 the	evening	crowds	 in	 the	city	center,	not	even	when
you	have	been	to	the	theater,	and	that	on	your	return	you	attract	your
mother’s	 attention	 from	 the	 street	 below	 by	 some	 special	 way	 of
clapping	 your	 hands,	 whereupon	 she	 sees	 that	 the	 street	 door	 is
unlocked	 for	you.	 Is	 this	 somewhat	 strange	description	correct?	And
by	taking	the	keys	with	you	on	your	visit	to	the	Metropol,	were	you
making	an	exception	simply	on	account	of	your	unusually	late	return?
Are	these	questions	ridiculous?	My	face	is	quite	serious,	and	if	you	are
laughing,	please	laugh	in	a	friendly	way	and	answer	me	in	detail.
This	spring,	at	the	latest,	Rowohlt	of	Leipzig	will	publish	a	Yearbook

of	Poetry,	edited	by	Max.	It	will	include	one	of	my	short	stories,	“The
Judgment,”	 which	 will	 be	 dedicated	 “To	 Fräulein	 Felice	 B.”	 Is	 this
dealing	 too	 imperiously	 with	 your	 rights?	 The	 more	 so	 since	 this
dedication	was	written	a	month	ago,	and	the	manuscript	is	no	longer
in	my	 possession?	 Could	 it	 be	 looked	 upon	 as	 a	 valid	 excuse	 that	 I
forced	myself	 to	 omit	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 sentence:	 “(To	 Fräulein	 B.)	 so
that	she	does	not	receive	presents	only	from	others”?	Besides,	so	far	as
I	can	see,	the	substance	of	the	story	has	not	the	remotest	connection
with	you	except	that	a	girl	who	makes	a	fleeting	appearance	bears	the
name	of	Frieda	Brandenfeld—which,	as	I	realized	later,	has	the	same
initials	as	yours.	The	only	connection	would	seem	to	be	in	the	story’s
attempt	to	be	worthy	of	you	from	afar.	And	this	is	what	the	dedication
is	meant	to	express.10
It	worries	me	that	I	shall	never	know	what	you	wrote	in	reply	to	my

last	letter	but	one.	So	many	years	went	by	without	a	word	from	you,
and	now	it	looks	as	though	another	month	of	oblivion	is	to	be	thrown
in	quite	unnecessarily.	Needless	 to	 say,	 I	 shall	make	 inquiries	at	 the
post	 office,	 but	 I	 stand	 little	 chance	 of	 learning	more	 of	 that	 letter
there	than	you	are	able	to	remember.	Couldn’t	you	write	and	tell	me



in	ten	words?
Definite	end,	definite	end	for	today.	The	interruptions	began	on	the
preceding	 page,	 even	 in	 this	 quiet	 room	 where	 I	 have	 gone	 into
hiding.	You	are	surprised	that	I	have	so	much	free	time	in	the	office
(it	is	an	extorted	exception)	and	that	I	write	only	from	the	office.	For
this	too	there	are	explanations,	but	no	time	to	write	them	down.
Farewell,	and	don’t	be	annoyed	by	the	daily	signing	of	receipts.11

Yours,	Franz	K.

To	Frau	Sophie	Friedmann
[LETTERHEAD:	Workers’	Accident	Insurance	Institute]

October	24,	1912
Dear	Frau	Friedmann,
Thank	you	very	much	for	the	delicacy	with	which	you	handled	this
matter	which	now	seems	 to	be	 fully	 straightened	out.	 I	 assume	 I	do
not	 have	 to	 look	 upon	 your	 failure	 to	 answer	my	 last	 letter,	 which
actually	did	not	call	for	any	particular	reply,	as	punishment	for	some
kind	of	stupidity	which	could	well	have	crept	into	my	two	letters	from
nervousness	or	for	some	other	reasons.	But	since	you	knew,	dear	Frau
Friedmann,	how	I	suffer	from	not	receiving	replies,	you	would	surely
rather	have	punished	my	stupidity	with	an	appropriate	letter	than	by
not	 answering.	 Even	 now	 I	 do	 not	 necessarily	 expect	 a	 reply,	 but	 I
hope	 that	 you	 will	 continue	 to	 be	 as	 well	 disposed	 toward	 me	 in
future	as	you	have	demonstrated	by	your	assistance	in	the	recent	past.
I	 should	 also	 like	 to	 thank	 your	husband,	 but	 refrain	 from	doing	 so
because	 firstly	 it	would	make	me	 feel	 slightly	 uneasy,	 and	 secondly
because,	as	 I	well	know,	you	and	your	husband	are	 so	much	at	one
that	gratitude	expressed	to	you	is	automatically	also	his.

With	kindest	regards,	yours,	Dr.	F.	Kafka

October	27,	1912
Dear	Fräulein	Bauer,
At	last,	at	eight	o’clock	in	the	evening—it	is	Sunday—I	am	able	to
write	to	you,	and	yet	everything	I	have	done	throughout	the	day	has
been	aimed	at	writing	 to	you	as	 soon	as	possible.	Are	your	Sundays
pleasant?	But	they	must	be,	after	all	the	work	you	do.	For	at	least	the
last	6	weeks	Sunday	for	me	has	been	a	miracle,	 the	glow	of	which	I



begin	to	see	on	waking	Monday	morning.	There	remains	the	problem
of	 getting	 through	 the	week	 until	 Sunday,	 of	 drawing	 out	my	work
through	 those	weekdays,	 but	 no	matter	 how	hard	 I	 try,	 by	 Friday	 I
usually	come	to	the	end.	If	one	spends	hour	after	hour	of	a	week	like
this,	even	by	day	not	much	less	alert	than	during	the	sleepless	night,
and	 if	 one	 takes	 a	 look	 at	 the	merciless	mechanical	 grind	 of	 such	 a
week,	 one	 really	 has	 to	 be	 thankful	 that	 these	 days,	 so	 desperately
mounting	up,	do	not	fall	back	only	to	start	all	over	again,	but	simply
fade	away,	and	that	at	last	the	evening	and	the	night	begin	and	bring
relief.
I	can	be	more	cheerful,	but	not	today;	the	rain	has	deprived	me	of
my	 Sunday	 walk;	 spent—which	 only	 seems	 to	 contradict	 my	 first
sentence—half	 the	 day	 in	 bed,	 the	 best	 place	 for	 sadness	 and
reflection;	the	Turks	are	losing,12	a	fact	which	could	lead	me	as	a	false
prophet	to	advocate	retreat,	not	only	for	soldiers	but	for	everything	(it
is	also	a	great	blow	 to	our	colonies),	and	 there	 is	nothing	 to	do	but
shut	one’s	eyes	and	ears	and	burrow	into	one’s	usual	occupations.
What	 a	way	 to	 entertain	 you!	Dear	 Fräulein	 Bauer,	 shall	 I	 get	 up
and	 stop	writing?	 But	 perhaps	 you	 can	 see	 through	 it	 all	 that	 I	 am
indeed	very	happy,	in	which	case	I	can	stay	here	and	go	on	writing.
You	 mention	 in	 your	 letter	 how	 uneasy	 you	 felt	 that	 evening	 in
Prague,	and	without	saying	so	and	perhaps	even	without	meaning	it,
this	passage	suggests	that	the	uneasiness	came	into	the	room	with	me,
for	 until	 then	 Max	 had	 hardly	 mentioned	 his	 operetta—which,
incidentally,	has	 caused	him	very	 little	 trouble	or	worry—and	 I	had
not	yet	disturbed	the	harmony	of	the	party	with	my	ridiculous	parcel.
Besides,	 this	happened	to	be	a	time	when	I	used	to	drop	in	on	them
often,	and	it	amused	me—by	being	especially	vivacious—all	the	more
so	the	later	it	got—to	keep	Otto	Brod,	who	likes	to	retire	early,	from
going	to	bed	for	so	long	that	the	whole	family	used	to	join	forces	(in
all	affection,	of	course)	to	ease	me	out	of	the	apartment.	As	a	result,
my	 arrival	 at	 so	 late	 an	 hour—it	 must	 have	 been	 past	 9	 o’clock—
represented	a	certain	threat.	In	their	minds	they	were	facing	two	very
different	 visitors:	 you,	 to	 whom	 everyone	 wished	 to	 be	 kind	 and
courteous,	 and	me,	 the	 professional	 disturber	 of	 sleep.	 For	 you,	 for
example,	 the	 piano	 was	 played;	 for	 me,	 on	 the	 other	 hand,	 Otto
fidgeted	 with	 the	 fire	 screen,	 which	 for	 me	 had	 become	 an
acknowledged	 hint	 for	 bedtime,	 but	which,	 for	 those	 unaware	 of	 it,
must	have	appeared	downright	silly	and	tiresome.	But	I	had	not	been
in	the	least	prepared	to	find	a	visitor	there;	I	had	simply	arranged	to



meet	Max	there	at	8	(as	usual	I	arrived	an	hour	late)	to	discuss	with
him	the	sequence	of	my	stories	 to	which	I	had	paid	no	attention	till
then,	 although	 the	 manuscript	 had	 to	 be	 sent	 off	 the	 following
morning.13	And	there	I	found	a	visitor,	which	rather	annoyed	me.	On
the	 other	 hand,	 I	was	 not	 in	 the	 least	 taken	 aback	by	 this	 visitor.14
Before	I	was	introduced,	I	offered	you	my	hand	across	the	large	table,
although	 you	 barely	 rose	 and	 probably	 had	 no	 desire	 to	 shake	 my
hand.	I	just	glanced	at	you	casually,	sat	down,	and	everything	seemed
to	be	all	right;	you	hardly	made	me	feel	even	the	slight	animation	that
strangers	in	a	familiar	setting	invariably	produce	in	me.	Having	once
accepted	 the	 fact	 that	 I	 could	 not	 go	 through	 the	 manuscript	 with
Max,	handing	around	the	Thalia	photographs	made	for	a	very	pleasant
diversion.	(Now	that	I	am	so	far	away	from	you,	I	could	kick	myself
for	using	 that	word	which	describes	 so	well	 the	 impression	 I	had	at
the	time.)	You	took	the	pictures	very	seriously,	and	glanced	up	only
when	Otto	gave	some	explanation	or	I	handed	you	another	picture.	A
comic	misunderstanding	arose	when	one	of	us,	I	don’t	remember	who,
began	 explaining	 a	 picture.	 To	 look	 at	 the	 photographs	 you	 had
stopped	eating,	and	when	Max	made	some	remark	about	the	food,	you
said	in	so	many	words	that	there	was	nothing	more	abhorrent	to	you
than	people	who	were	constantly	eating.	In	the	middle	of	this	the	bell
(it	 is	 now	hours	 later,	 11	 P.M.,	 the	 time	when	my	own	work	usually
begins,	but	I	cannot	get	away	from	this	letter)	well,	the	bell	rang,	and
you	 were	 telling	 us	 about	 the	 opening	 scene	 of	 an	 operetta,	 The
Autogirl,15	 which	 you	 had	 seen	 at	 the	 Residenz	 Theater.	 (Is	 there	 a
Residenz	Theater?	And	was	it	an	operetta?)	There	were	15	people	on
the	 stage,	 and	 from	an	anteroom	where	 a	 telephone	 could	be	heard
someone	appeared	and	called	upon	each	person	in	turn	to	answer	the
telephone,	 using	 the	 same	 phrase	 each	 time.	 I	 still	 remember	 the
phrase,	but	am	ashamed	to	write	it	down	because	I	cannot	pronounce
it	 properly,	 let	 alone	write	 it	 down,	 although	at	 the	 time	 I	not	 only
heard	it	quite	plainly	but	also	read	it	from	your	lips,	and	although	it
has	meanwhile	passed	 through	my	head	many	 times	 in	 the	constant
search	 for	 its	 correct	 formulation.	 I	 don’t	 remember	 how	 after	 this
(no,	 before—because	 I	 was	 still	 sitting	 near	 the	 door,	 diagonally
opposite	you)	the	conversation	turned	to	thrashings	and	brothers	and
sisters.	The	names	of	several	members	of	your	family	of	whom	I	had
never	heard	were	mentioned,	including	the	name	Ferry	(might	he	be
your	brother?),16	and	you	were	telling	us	that	as	a	little	girl	you	had



often	been	beaten	by	brothers	and	cousins	(also	by	Herr	Friedmann?),
and	that	you	had	felt	almost	defenseless	against	it.	You	ran	your	hand
down	 your	 left	 arm,	 which	 in	 those	 days	 had	 been	 covered	 with
bruises.	But	you	didn’t	 look	at	 all	 sorry	 for	yourself,	 and	although	 I
cannot	 account	 for	 it,	 I	 could	 not	 imagine	 how	 anyone	 could	 have
dared	 to	 beat	 you,	 however	 little	 you	 may	 have	 been.—Then	 you
remarked	quite	casually,	while	examining	or	reading	something	(you
did	not	look	up	nearly	often	enough,	and	after	all,	it	was	such	a	short
evening),	 that	 you	 had	 studied	 Hebrew.	 While	 on	 the	 one	 hand	 I
marveled	at	this,	on	the	other	(these	are	only	the	opinions	formed	at
the	 time,	 and	 they	 have	 passed	 through	 a	 fine	 sieve	 since	 then)	 I
would	 have	 preferred	 you	 not	 to	 have	 mentioned	 it	 with	 such
exaggerated	casualness,	and	so	I	was	secretly	delighted	when	later	on
you	were	unable	 to	 translate	Tel	Aviv.—Then	 it	 also	 transpired	 that
you	 are	 a	 Zionist,	 and	 this	 suited	 me	 very	 well.—Still	 in	 the	 same
room	 there	 was	 some	 discussion	 about	 your	 job,	 and	 Frau	 Brod
mentioned	a	pretty	batiste	dress	she	had	seen	in	your	hotel	room,	for	I
think	 you	 were	 on	 your	 way	 to	 some	 wedding	 (I	 am	 doing	 more
guessing	than	remembering)	which	was	to	take	place	in	Budapest.17—
When	 you	 got	 up	 it	 turned	 out	 that	 you	 were	 wearing	 Frau	 Brod’s
slippers,	because	your	 shoes	had	 to	be	dried.	The	weather	had	been
terrible	all	day.	These	slippers	bothered	you	a	bit,	and	while	walking
through	the	dark	center	room,	you	told	me	you	were	used	to	slippers
with	heels.	Such	slippers	were	new	to	me.—In	the	music	room	you	sat
opposite	 me,	 and	 I	 began	 to	 spread	 out	 my	 manuscript.	 Everyone
offered	me	funny	advice	as	to	how	it	should	be	mailed,	but	I	can	no
longer	 remember	 the	 advice	 you	 gave.	 What	 I	 do	 remember	 is
something	which	happened	 in	 the	other	 room	and	which	 so	amazed
me	 that	 I	 banged	 the	 table.	 You	 actually	 said	 you	 enjoyed	 copying
manuscripts,	that	you	had	also	been	copying	manuscripts	in	Berlin	for
some	gentleman	(curse	the	sound	of	that	word	when	unaccompanied
by	 name	 and	 explanation!)	 and	 you	 asked	 Max	 to	 send	 you	 some
manuscripts.—The	 best	 I	 accomplished	 that	 evening	 was	 that	 I
happened	to	have	with	me	a	copy	of	Palästina,18	for	which	I	should	be
forgiven	 everything.	 The	 trip	 to	 Palestine	was	 discussed,	 and	 it	was
then	 that	 you	 offered	 to	 shake	 my	 hand,	 or	 rather,	 thanks	 to	 an
inspiration,	 I	 extracted	 it	 from	you.—During	 the	 piano	playing	 I	 sat
diagonally	behind	you;	you	had	your	legs	crossed	and	kept	plucking	at
your	 coiffure	 which	 I	 can	 no	 longer	 visualize	 from	 the	 front;	 all	 I
know	is	that	while	the	piano	was	being	played,	your	hair	stuck	out	a



little	at	the	sides.—Later,	however,	a	great	dispersal	took	place:	Frau
Brod	dozed	on	the	sofa,	Herr	Brod	busied	himself	at	the	bookshelves,
Otto	 fidgeted	with	 the	 fire	 screen.	Max’s	 books	were	 discussed,	 you
said	 something	 about	Arnold	 Beer,19	mentioned	 a	 review	 in	Ost	 und
West,20	 and	 finally,	 while	 turning	 the	 pages	 of	 a	 volume	 in	 the
Propyläen	edition	of	Goethe’s	works,	you	said	you	had	started	to	read
Nornepygge	Castle,21	but	hadn’t	been	able	to	finish	it.	At	this	remark	I
really	froze	with	horror—for	myself,	for	you,	for	everyone.	Wasn’t	this
an	unnecessary,	inexplicable	affront?	And	yet	you	carried	through	this
seemingly	irretrievable	situation	like	a	heroine,	while	we	all	stared	at
your	 head,	 bent	 over	 the	 book.	 It	 turned	 out	 to	 be	 not	 an	 affront,
indeed	 not	 even	 the	mildest	 criticism,	 but	 simply	 a	 fact	 which	 you
yourself	found	surprising,	and	which	made	you	decide	to	try	the	book
again	 some	 time.	 The	 impasse	 could	 not	 have	 been	 resolved	 more
handsomely,	 and	 I	 thought	 we	 all	 had	 good	 reason	 to	 feel	 slightly
ashamed	 of	 ourselves.—As	 a	 diversion,	 Director	 Brod	 produced	 the
illustrated	 volume	 of	 the	 Propyläen	 edition	 and	 announced	 that	 he
would	show	you	Goethe	in	his	underwear.	You	quoted:	“He	is	still	a
king,	even	in	his	underwear,”22	and	this	quotation	was	the	only	thing
I	disliked	about	you	 that	 evening.	My	displeasure	almost	 gave	me	a
contraction	of	the	throat,	and	in	fact	I	should	have	asked	myself	why	I
felt	so	involved.	But	I	am	never	consistent.—I	could	not	get	over	the
speed	with	which	you	finally	scurried	out	of	the	room,	and	returned
in	your	shoes.	But	I	did	not	like	the	comparison	to	a	gazelle	that	Frau
Brod	made	twice.—I	still	remember	very	clearly	the	way	you	put	on
your	hat	and	stuck	in	the	hatpins.	The	hat	was	rather	large,	and	white
underneath.—Out	 in	 the	 street	 I	 lapsed	 at	 once	 into	 one	 of	my	 not
altogether	 unusual	 states	 of	 semitrance,	when	 I	 see	 nothing	 clearly,
except	 my	 own	 worthlessness.	 On	 Perlgasse,	 perhaps	 to	 relieve	 my
awkward	silence,	you	asked	where	I	lived,	and	quite	naturally	wanted
to	 know	 whether	 my	 way	 home	 and	 yours	 to	 your	 hotel	 were	 the
same;	but	I,	miserable	fool	that	I	am,	asked	if	you	wanted	my	address,
evidently	 assuming	 that	 you—having	 hardly	 arrived	 in	 Berlin	 and
fired	by	the	idea	of	the	trip	to	Palestine—would	at	once	want	to	write
to	me,	 and	 so	were	 loath	 to	 run	 the	 risk	 of	 finding	 yourself	 in	 the
desperate	position	of	not	having	my	address.	This	blunder,	needless	to
say,	 disconcerted	 me	 for	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 way,	 insofar	 as	 there	 was
anything	within	me	 to	be	disconcerted.—Even	 in	 the	 first	 room	and
again	 in	 the	 street,	 there	 was	 some	 talk	 of	 a	 man	 in	 your	 Prague
branch	 who	 had	 taken	 you	 that	 afternoon	 by	 carriage	 to	 Hradčany



Castle.	The	existence	of	this	man	seemed	to	make	it	impossible	for	me
to	see	you	off	at	 the	station	next	morning	with	flowers,	which	I	had
been	 considering	 vaguely	 for	 some	 time.	 The	 early	 hour	 of	 your
departure,	 the	 impossibility	 of	 buying	 flowers	 at	 such	 a	 time,	made
renunciation	 easier.—On	 Obstgasse	 and	 along	 the	 Graben,	 Director
Brod	 did	most	 of	 the	 talking,	while	 you	 told	 the	 story	 of	 how	 your
mother	 has	 the	 front	 door	 opened	 in	 answer	 to	 your	 clapping—a
story,	 incidentally,	 for	 which	 you	 still	 owe	 me	 an	 explanation.
Otherwise,	 the	 time	was	 shamefully	wasted	 comparing	 the	 traffic	 in
Prague	with	 that	 in	 Berlin.	 If	 I	 am	 not	mistaken,	mention	was	 also
made	 of	 your	 having	 had	 a	 snack	 at	 the	 Repräsentationshaus23
opposite	 your	 hotel.	 Finally	Herr	 Brod	 gave	 you	 some	 advice	 about
your	 journey	 and	 named	 several	 stations	 where	 you	 could	 get
something	to	eat.	You	intended	to	have	breakfast	in	the	dining	car.	It
was	then	that	I	heard	you	had	left	your	umbrella	on	the	train,	and	this
trifling	detail	(trifling	for	me)	added	a	new	dimension	to	my	picture	of
you.—That	you	had	not	yet	packed,	and	still	intended	to	read	in	bed,
made	me	uneasy.	During	the	previous	night	you	had	read	until	four	in
the	 morning.	 As	 reading	 matter	 for	 the	 journey	 you	 had	 brought:
Björnson’s	Flags	Are	Flying	in	Town	and	Harbor	and	Andersen’s	Picture-
Book	Without	 Pictures.	 At	 the	 time	 I	 felt	 I	 should	 have	 guessed	 you
would	 bring	 these	 books,	 which	 of	 course	 I	 could	 never	 have
succeeded	in	doing.	On	entering	the	hotel	some	sort	of	embarrassment
made	me	 crowd	 into	 your	 section	 of	 the	 revolving	 door,	 and	 I	 very
nearly	trod	on	your	feet.—Then	the	three	of	us	stood	for	a	moment	in
front	of	the	waiter	near	the	elevator	in	which	you	were	to	disappear
almost	at	once,	and	the	door	of	which	was	already	being	opened.	You
then	had	a	brief	and	very	haughty	conversation	with	the	waiter,	 the
sound	of	which,	if	I	pause	for	an	instant,	still	rings	in	my	ears.	It	was
not	easy	to	convince	you	that	a	car	would	be	unnecessary	to	go	to	the
nearby	 station.	 You	 had	 thought	 you	 were	 leaving	 from	 the	 Franz
Josef	 station.—We	 then	 said	 our	 last	 farewells,	 and	 in	 the	 clumsiest
possible	way	I	again	mentioned	the	trip	to	Palestine;	and	it	struck	me
only	then	that	I	had	mentioned	this	trip,	which	probably	only	I	took
seriously,	far	too	many	times	during	the	course	of	the	evening.

With	 only	 trifling,	 unimportant	 but	 numerous	 omissions,	 these	 are
roughly	all	the	outward	events	of	that	evening	that	I	still	remember—
after	probably	more	than	30	other	evenings	spent	meanwhile	with	the
Brod	 family,	which	unfortunately	may	have	blurred	certain	 things.	 I



have	written	them	down	to	counter	your	remark	that	little	notice	was
taken	 of	 you	 that	 evening,	 and	 also	 because	 I	 have	 resisted	 far	 too
long	 the	 desire	 to	write	 down	my	memories	 of	 that	 evening	 before
they	are	forgotten.	But	the	very	sight	of	this	quantity	of	paper	covered
in	writing	will	 fill	 you	with	dismay;	 first,	you	will	 curse	 the	 remark
that	caused	 it;	 then	you	will	 curse	yourself	 for	having	 to	 read	 it	all;
then	some	faint	curiosity	may	perhaps	make	you	read	on	to	the	end,
by	which	time	your	tea	will	be	completely	cold;	and	finally	you	will
be	in	such	a	bad	temper	that	you’ll	swear	by	everything	you	hold	dear
that	in	no	circumstances	would	you	supplement	my	recollections	with
any	 of	 yours;	 in	 your	 annoyance,	 however,	 you	won’t	 consider	 that
supplementing	 involves	 less	 trouble	 than	 the	 initial	 recording,	 and
that	by	this	contribution	you	would	give	me	far	more	pleasure	than	I
have	succeeded	in	giving	you	by	this	first	collection	of	material.—But
now	I	really	must	leave	you	in	peace,	and	end	by	asking	you	to	accept
my	kindest	regards.

Yours,	Franz	K.

Still	not	the	end,	and	what’s	more,	a	question	difficult	to	answer:
How	long	can	chocolate	be	kept	before	it	goes	bad?

October	29,	1912
Dear	Fräulein	Bauer,
Now	to	something	very	important,	even	if	in	great	haste.	(This	is	no

longer	written	from	the	office,	for	my	office	work	defies	my	writing	to
you;	 that	 kind	 of	 work	 is	 completely	 foreign	 to	 me,	 and	 bears	 no
relation	 to	my	 real	needs.)	You	must	not	 think	 that	with	an	endless
letter,	 such	 as	 that	 of	 the	 day	 before	 yesterday,	 for	 which	 I	 have
amply	reproached	myself	already,	I	mean	to	rob	you	not	only	of	your
time	 for	 reading,	 but	 also	 of	 your	 time	 for	 resting,	 and	 want	 to
commit	 you	 to	 a	 prompt	 and	 detailed	 reply;	 I	 should	 have	 to	 be
ashamed	of	myself	if	after	your	strenuous	day’s	work	I	came	to	plague
your	evenings.	That	is	not	the	object	of	my	letters,	not	by	any	means;
but	 surely	 this	 is	 obvious,	 and	 you	 won’t	 have	 interpreted	 it
otherwise.	 Only—and	 this	 is	 most	 important—and	 this	 is	 most
important	 (so	 important	 that	 in	my	haste	 it	 becomes	a	 litany)—that
you	 should	 not	 write	 long	 letters,	 even	 on	 those	 evenings	 when,
regardless	of	my	letters,	you	feel	like	writing.	No	matter	how	pleasant



I	 imagine	your	office	 to	be—are	you	alone	 in	 a	 room?—I	no	 longer
want	to	feel	that	I	have	kept	you	there	until	late	in	the	evening.	Five
lines,	 yes,	 you	 could	 write	 that	 much	 every	 now	 and	 again	 in	 the
evening,	yet	in	spite	of	myself	I	cannot	suppress	the	cruel	remark	that
five	 lines	 can	 be	 written	more	 often	 than	 long	 letters.	 The	 sight	 of
your	 letters	at	 the	door—they	now	arrive	around	noon—could	make
me	 forget	 all	 consideration	 for	 you,	 but	 reading	 the	 time	 of	 day,	 or
thinking	 that	 I	 may	 have	 deprived	 you	 of	 a	 walk,	 that	 again	 is
intolerable.	Have	I	the	right	to	dissuade	you	from	taking	Pyramidon,
since	I	am	partly	to	blame	for	your	headaches?	When	do	you	usually
go	 for	walks?	Gym	twice	a	week,	 the	professor	 three	 times—it	must
have	been	in	the	lost	letter	that	you	wrote	about	him—how	much	free
time	is	 left	after	all	 that?	And	needlework	on	Sunday,	whatever	for?
Can	 it	 really	please	your	mother,	 if	 she	knows	 that	you	have	 to	use
your	leisure	for	it?	Especially	as	it	appears	from	your	letters	that	your
mother	is	your	best	friend,	and	gay	as	well.—I	wish	you	would	let	me
know	about	all	 this	 in	 five	 lines,	 so	 that	rather	 than	having	 to	write
and	think	about	it	any	more,	we	could	look	at	and	listen	to	each	other
calmly,	 without	 self-reproach,	 you	 in	 your	 goodness	 and
understanding,	I	in	the	way	I	must.

Yours,	Franz	K.

[LETTERHEAD:	Workers’	Accident	Insurance	Institute]
October	31,	1912

Dear	Fräulein	Bauer,
Just	 look,	how	many	 impossibilities	 there	are	 in	our	 letters.	Can	 I

remove	the	flavor	of	nauseating	false	generosity	from	my	request	that
you	write	me	only	 five	 lines?	That	 is	 impossible.	And	 is	my	 request
not	 sincere?	 Certainly	 it	 is	 sincere.	 And	 is	 it	 not	 perhaps	 also
insincere?	Of	course	 it	 is	 insincere,	and	how	insincere	 it	 is!	When	at
last	a	letter	arrives—after	the	door	to	my	room	has	opened	a	thousand
times	to	admit,	not	 the	man	with	the	 letter,	but	 innumerable	people
whose	calm	expressions	 torment	me	because	 they	 feel	 themselves	 to
be	 in	 the	 right	 place,	whereas	 only	 the	man	with	 the	 letter,	 and	no
one	else,	has	the	right	to	appear—when	at	last	the	letter	arrives,	then
I	think	for	a	while	I	can	be	calm,	that	I	shall	be	satisfied	by	it	and	that
the	day	will	go	well.	But	then	I	have	read	it,	there	is	more	in	it	than	I
might	ever	have	expected	to	 learn;	 the	 letter	has	obviously	taken	up



your	whole	evening,	and	perhaps	there	was	hardly	time	for	your	walk
down	Leipziger	Strasse;	I	read	the	letter	once,	put	it	aside,	and	read	it
again;	I	pick	up	a	file	but	am	really	only	reading	your	letter;	I	am	with
the	 typist,	 to	whom	 I	 am	 supposed	 to	dictate,	 and	again	your	 letter
slowly	slides	 through	my	fingers	and	 I	have	begun	to	draw	it	out	of
my	pocket	when	people	ask	me	something	and	I	know	perfectly	well	I
should	not	be	thinking	of	your	letter	now,	yet	that	thought	is	all	that
occurs	to	me—but	after	all	that	I	am	as	hungry	as	before,	as	restless	as
before,	and	once	again	the	door	starts	swinging	merrily,	as	though	the
man	with	the	letter	were	about	to	appear	again.	That	is	what	you	call
the	“little	pleasure”	your	letters	give	me.	This	answers	your	question,
whether	it	is	disagreeable	for	me	to	get	a	letter	from	you	every	day	at
the	 office.	 Needless	 to	 say	 it	 is	 almost	 impossible	 in	 any	 way	 to
associate	the	arrival	of	your	letters	with	my	work	at	the	office,	but	it
is	 just	 as	 impossible	 to	work	 and	 to	wait	 in	 vain	 for	 a	 letter,	 or	 to
work	 and	 wonder	 whether	 there	 may	 be	 a	 letter	 at	 home.
Impossibilities	on	every	side!	And	yet	it	is	not	so	bad,	for	lately	I	have
managed	 other	 impossibilities	 in	 my	 office	 work;	 one	 must	 not
prostrate	oneself	before	the	minor	impossibilities,	otherwise	the	major
impossibilities	would	never	come	into	view.
Today	I	should	not	complain	at	all,	for	your	last	two	letters	arrived
within	only	two	hours	of	each	other,	and	of	course	I	cursed	the	mail
for	yesterday’s	incompetence,	as	much	as	I	praise	it	today.
But	I	am	not	answering	anything,	and	am	hardly	asking	questions,
and	all	because	the	pleasure	of	writing	to	you,	although	I	am	not	at
once	aware	of	it,	invests	all	my	letters	to	you	with	a	sense	of	infinity,
which	means	of	course	that	nothing	essential	need	be	said	on	the	first
few	pages.	But	wait,	 tomorrow	 I	hope	 (I	hope	 for	my	 sake)	 to	have
time	 enough	 to	 answer	 all	 questions	 at	 one	 go,	 and	 to	 ask	 so	many
questions	that	for	the	moment	at	least	my	heart	will	feel	lighter.
Today	I	will	only	add	that	at	the	point	in	your	letter	that	deals	with
your	hat,	 I	 bit	my	 tongue.	So	 it	was	black	underneath?	Where	were
my	eyes?	And	 it	was	by	no	means	unimportant	 to	me.	But	 then	 the
whole	 crown	must	 have	 been	 white,	 and	 that	might	 have	 confused
me,	as	I	had	to	look	down	on	it	because	of	my	height.	Also,	you	bent
your	head	a	little	while	putting	on	the	hat.	In	short,	there	are	excuses
as	 usual,	 but	 I	 should	 not	 have	 written	 about	 something	 I	 was	 not
completely	sure	of.
With	warmest	greetings,	and	I	kiss	your	hand,	if	that	is	permitted.



Yours,	Franz	K.

November	1,	1912
Dear	Fräulein	Felice,
You	must	not	take	offense	at	this	form	of	address,	at	least	not	this
time,	for	if	I	am	to	write	about	my	mode	of	life,	as	you	have	asked	me
to	do	several	times,	I	shall	probably	have	some	delicate	things	to	say
which	I	could	hardly	utter	 to	a	“Fräulein	Bauer.”	Moreover	this	new
form	of	address	cannot	be	so	very	bad,	or	I	should	not	have	thought	it
out	with	so	much	and	such	lasting	satisfaction.
My	life	consists,	and	basically	always	has	consisted,	of	attempts	at
writing,	mostly	unsuccessful.	But	when	 I	 didn’t	write,	 I	was	 at	 once
flat	 on	 the	 floor,	 fit	 for	 the	 dustbin.	My	 energies	 have	 always	 been
pitifully	weak;	 even	 though	 I	 didn’t	 quite	 realize	 it,	 it	 soon	 became
evident	 that	 I	 had	 to	 spare	 myself	 on	 all	 sides,	 renounce	 a	 little
everywhere,	 in	order	to	retain	just	enough	strength	for	what	seemed
to	 me	 my	 main	 purpose.	 When	 I	 didn’t	 do	 so	 (oh	 God,	 even	 on	 a
holiday24	 such	as	 this,	when	 I	am	acting	as	duty	officer,	 there	 is	no
peace,	just	visitor	after	visitor,	like	a	little	hell	let	loose)	but	tried	to
reach	beyond	my	strength,	I	was	automatically	forced	back,	wounded,
humbled,	 forever	 weakened;	 yet	 this	 very	 fact	 which	 made	 me
temporarily	unhappy	is	precisely	what	gave	me	confidence	in	the	long
run,	and	I	began	to	 think	that	somewhere,	however	difficult	 to	 find,
there	must	be	a	lucky	star	under	which	it	would	be	possible	to	go	on
living.	I	once	drew	up	a	detailed	list	of	the	things	I	have	sacrificed	to
writing,	as	well	as	the	things	that	were	taken	from	me	for	the	sake	of
writing,	 or	 rather	 whose	 loss	 was	 only	 made	 bearable	 by	 this
explanation.25
Just	as	I	am	thin,	and	I	am	the	thinnest	person	I	know	(and	that’s
saying	 something,	 for	 I	 am	 no	 stranger	 to	 sanatoria),	 there	 is	 also
nothing	 to	 me	 which,	 in	 relation	 to	 writing,	 one	 could	 call
superfluous,	 superfluous	 in	 the	 sense	 of	 overflowing.	 If	 there	 is	 a
higher	power	that	wishes	to	use	me,	or	does	use	me,	then	I	am	at	its
mercy,	 if	 no	more	 than	 as	 a	 well-prepared	 instrument.	 If	 not,	 I	 am
nothing,	and	will	suddenly	be	abandoned	in	a	dreadful	void.
Now	I	have	expanded	my	life	 to	accommodate	my	thoughts	about
you,	and	there	is	hardly	a	quarter	of	an	hour	of	my	waking	time	when
I	 haven’t	 thought	 about	 you,	 and	 many	 quarter-hours	 when	 I	 do
nothing	 else.	 But	 even	 this	 is	 related	 to	 my	 writing,	 my	 life	 is



determined	 by	 nothing	 but	 the	 ups	 and	 downs	 of	 writing,	 and
certainly	during	a	barren	period	I	should	never	have	had	the	courage
to	turn	to	you.	This	is	just	as	true	as	it	is	true	that	since	that	evening	I
have	felt	as	though	I	had	an	opening	in	my	chest	through	which	there
was	an	unrestrained	drawing-in	and	drawing-out	until	one	evening	in
bed,	when,	by	calling	to	mind	a	story	from	the	Bible,	the	necessity	of
this	 sensation,	 as	 well	 as	 the	 truth	 of	 the	 Bible	 story,	 were
simultaneously	confirmed.
Lately	I	have	found	to	my	amazement	how	intimately	you	have	now
become	associated	with	my	writing,	although	until	recently	I	believed
that	 the	only	 time	 I	 did	not	 think	 about	 you	at	 all	was	while	 I	was
writing.	 In	 one	 short	 paragraph	 I	 had	 written,	 there	 were,	 among
others,	the	following	references	to	you	and	your	letters:	Someone	was
given	a	bar	of	chocolate.	There	was	talk	of	small	diversions	someone
had	 during	 working	 hours.	 Then	 there	 was	 a	 telephone	 call.	 And
finally	somebody	urged	someone	to	go	to	bed,	and	threatened	to	take
him	 straight	 to	 his	 room	 if	 he	 did	 not	 obey,	 which	 was	 certainly
prompted	by	 the	 recollection	of	 your	mother’s	 annoyance	when	you
stayed	 so	 late	 at	 the	 office.26—Such	 passages	 are	 especially	 dear	 to
me;	in	them	I	take	hold	of	you,	without	your	feeling	it,	and	therefore
without	your	having	to	resist.	And	even	if	you	were	to	read	some	of
my	writings,	these	little	details	would	surely	escape	you.	But	believe
me,	probably	nowhere	in	the	world	could	you	let	yourself	be	caught
with	greater	unconcern	than	here.
My	mode	of	 life	 is	devised	solely	 for	writing,	and	 if	 there	are	any
changes,	 then	only	 for	 the	 sake	of	perhaps	 fitting	 in	better	with	my
writing;	for	time	is	short,	my	strength	is	limited,	the	office	is	a	horror,
the	 apartment	 is	 noisy,	 and	 if	 a	 pleasant,	 straightforward	 life	 is	 not
possible	 then	one	must	 try	 to	wriggle	 through	by	 subtle	maneuvers.
The	 satisfaction	 gained	 by	maneuvering	 one’s	 timetable	 successfully
cannot	be	compared	to	the	permanent	misery	of	knowing	that	fatigue
of	 any	 kind	 shows	 itself	 better	 and	 more	 clearly	 in	 writing	 than
anything	one	is	really	trying	to	say.	For	the	past	six	weeks,	with	some
interruptions	 in	 the	 last	 few	 days,	 due	 to	 unbearable	weakness,	my
timetable	has	been	as	follows:	from	8	to	2	or	2:30	in	the	office,	then
lunch	till	3	or	3:30,	after	that	sleep	in	bed	(usually	only	attempts:	for
a	 whole	 week	 I	 saw	 nothing	 but	 Montenegrins	 in	 my	 sleep,	 in
extremely	disagreeable	clarity,	which	gave	me	headaches,	I	saw	every
detail	 of	 their	 complicated	 dress)	 till	 7:30,	 then	 ten	 minutes	 of
exercises,	 naked	 at	 the	 open	 window,	 then	 an	 hour’s	 walk—alone,



with	Max,	or	with	another	friend,	then	dinner	with	my	family	(I	have
three	 sisters,	 one	 married,	 one	 engaged;	 the	 single	 one,	 without
prejudicing	my	affection	for	the	others,	 is	easily	my	favorite);27	 then
at	 10:30	 (but	 often	not	 till	 11:30)	 I	 sit	 down	 to	write,	 and	 I	 go	 on,
depending	 on	 my	 strength,	 inclination,	 and	 luck,	 until	 1,	 2,	 or	 3
o’clock,	 once	 even	 till	 6	 in	 the	 morning.	 Then	 again	 exercises,	 as
above,	but	of	course	avoiding	all	exertions,	a	wash,	and	then,	usually
with	a	slight	pain	in	my	heart	and	twitching	stomach	muscles,	to	bed.
Then	 every	 imaginable	 effort	 to	 get	 to	 sleep—i.e.,	 to	 achieve	 the
impossible,	 for	 one	 cannot	 sleep	 (Herr	 K.	 even	 demands	 dreamless
sleep)	and	at	the	same	time	be	thinking	about	one’s	work	and	trying
to	 solve	 with	 certainty	 the	 one	 question	 that	 certainly	 is	 insoluble,
namely,	whether	there	will	be	a	letter	from	you	the	next	day,	and	at
what	 time.	 Thus	 the	 night	 consists	 of	 two	 parts:	 one	 wakeful,	 the
other	 sleepless,	 and	 if	 I	were	 to	 tell	 you	 about	 it	 at	 length	 and	 you
were	prepared	to	listen,	I	should	never	finish.	So	it	is	hardly	surprising
if,	 at	 the	 office	 the	 next	morning,	 I	 only	 just	manage	 to	 start	work
with	what	little	strength	is	left.	In	one	of	the	corridors	along	which	I
always	walk	 to	 reach	my	 typist,	 there	used	 to	be	a	coffinlike	 trolley
for	the	moving	of	files	and	documents,	and	each	time	I	passed	it	I	felt
as	though	it	had	been	made	for	me,	and	was	waiting	for	me.
To	be	precise,	I	must	not	forget	that	I	am	not	only	a	clerk,	but	also	a
manufacturer.	For	my	brother-in-law	owns	an	asbestos	factory,	and	I
(although	 only	 through	money	my	 father	 put	 into	 it)	 am	 a	 partner,
and	 as	 such	 am	 on	 the	 board.	 This	 factory	 has	 already	 caused	 me
enough	pain	and	worry,	but	I	don’t	want	to	talk	about	that	now;28	 in
any	 case,	 I	 have	 neglected	 it	 for	 some	 time	 (i.e.,	 I	 withhold	 my
anyway	useless	collaboration)	as	much	as	I	can,	and	more	or	less	get
by	with	it.
Once	again	I	have	told	you	so	 little,	and	have	asked	no	questions,
and	once	again	I	must	close.	But	not	a	single	answer	and,	even	more
certainly,	not	a	single	question	shall	be	lost.	There	exists	some	kind	of
sorcery	 by	 which	 two	 people,	 without	 seeing	 each	 other,	 without
talking	to	each	other,	can	at	least	discover	the	greater	part	about	each
other’s	past,	 literally	 in	a	 flash,	without	having	to	 tell	each	other	all
and	 everything;	 but	 this,	 after	 all,	 is	 almost	 an	 instrument	 of	 Black
Magic	(without	seeming	to	be)	which,	although	never	without	reward,
one	would	certainly	never	resort	to	with	impunity.	Therefore	I	won’t
say	 it,	 unless	 you	 guess	 it	 first.	 It	 is	 terribly	 short,	 like	 all	 magic
formulas.	 Farewell,	 and	 let	 me	 reinforce	 this	 greeting	 by	 lingering



over	your	hand.
Yours,	Franz	K.

[LETTERHEAD:	Workers’	Accident	Insurance	Institute]
October	[November]	2,	1912

Dear	Fräulein	Bauer,
What’s	this?	You	too	get	tired?	It	is	highly	disconcerting	to	think	of

you	tired	and	alone	in	the	evening	at	the	office.	What	do	you	wear	at
the	office?	And	what	does	the	main	part	of	your	work	consist	of?	Do
you	write	or	dictate?	And	yet	yours	must	be	a	superior	position,	if	you
have	 to	 talk	 to	 so	 many	 people,	 for	 the	 junior	 employee	 has	 to	 sit
silently	 at	 his	 desk.29	 I	 had	 already	 guessed	 that	 your	 office	 is
attached	 to	 a	 factory,	 but	 what	 does	 it	 produce?	 Just	 Parlographs?
Does	 anyone	 actually	 buy	 them?	 I	 am	 happy	 to	 be	 able	 to	 dictate
(except	 on	 the	 rare	 occasions	 when	 I	 do	 my	 own	 typing)	 to	 a	 live
human	being	 (this	 is	my	main	 function)	who	now	and	 then,	when	 I
can’t	think	of	anything,	drops	off	for	a	moment	or	stretches	his	limbs
or	lights	his	pipe,	and	lets	me	look	quietly	out	of	the	window.	Or	who,
as	 he	 did	 today,	 for	 example,	 when	 I	 rebuked	 him	 for	 writing	 too
slowly,	 tried	 to	 placate	 me	 by	 reminding	me	 that	 I	 had	 received	 a
letter.	Is	there	a	Parlograph	that	can	do	that?	I	remember	some	time
ago	a	Dictaphone	(I	wasn’t	prejudiced	then,	as	I	am	now,	against	the
products	 of	 your	 competitors)	 being	 demonstrated	 to	 us,	 and	 how
extremely	boring	and	impractical	I	found	it.	So	I	can’t	quite	visualize
this	kind	of	business,	and	can	only	hope	that	it	is	in	fact	organized	in
as	pointless	and	airy	a	way	as	I	imagine,	and	that	your	life	in	the	firm
is	correspondingly	easy	and	effortless.	By	the	way,	I	cannot	find	your
Prague	 branch,	 which	 according	 to	 my	 recollection	 of	 one	 of	 your
remarks	should	be	on	Obstgasse	or	Ferdinandstrasse.	I	have	looked	for
it	 several	 times,	 in	 the	 hope	 that	 the	 firm’s	 nameplate	 would	 offer
some	sign	or	idea	of	you.
To	describe	my	work	at	the	office	gives	me	little	pleasure.	As	such,

it	is	not	worth	your	knowing	about,	nor	worth	my	writing	about,	for	it
leaves	me	neither	time	nor	peace	to	write	to	you,	makes	me	as	fidgety
and	stupid	as	I	am	at	the	moment,	and	the	thought	of	you	incites	in
me	a	desire	for	revenge	that	gives	me	real	pleasure.
Farewell.	Tomorrow	will	probably	be	a	quiet	Sunday,	so	I	will	write

a	 lot.	And	don’t	work	yourself	 to	exhaustion!	Don’t	make	me	sad!—



And	this	I	write	on	the	very	day	on	which	you	will	have	received	my
moaning	letter.	How	weak	we	all	are!

Yours,	Franz	K.

November	3,	1912
Dear	Fräulein	Felice,
My	nephew30	is	crying	next	door,	my	mother	keeps	saying	to	him	in
Czech	“good	boy”	and	then	“little	boy”;	it	is	already	6	o’clock	in	the
evening;	no,	the	clock	says	it	is	6:30;	I	stayed	too	long	with	Max	this
afternoon;	he	read	me	two	chapters	of	a	new	story,	“From	a	Sewing
School,”31	 it	 is	well	done	and	full	of	feminine	sentiments,	and	yet	in
places	it	passed	me	by,	preoccupied	as	I	was	in	getting	to	this	letter,
to	which,	if	I	calculate	correctly,	I	have	been	drawn	ever	since	2	A.M.,
the	moment	 I	 stopped	my	 own	work.	 But	 by	 now	 it	 is	 so	 late,	 my
tyrannical	timetable	actually	demands	that	I	should	have	been	asleep
for	a	whole	hour;	moreover,	this	is	the	last	comparatively	quiet	time
in	 the	 apartment	 before	 everybody	 goes	 to	 sleep;	 finally,	 printer’s
proofs32	 have	been	 lying	on	my	 table	 for	 some	days	 and	 I	have	not
even	 looked	 at	 them.	 They	 should	 be	 sent	 off	 tomorrow	 and	 will
probably	deprive	me	of	the	few	remaining	evening-	and	night-hours.
For	all	these	mainly	stupid	reasons	this	won’t	be	as	methodical	a	letter
as	 I	 had	 wished	 it	 to	 be	 and	 as	 befits	 a	 Sunday.	 But	 for	 all	 these
reasons,	 including	 the	 last,	 I	am	discontented	and	sad,	and	 from	the
kitchen	 the	 tiny	 kitten’s	 squeaks	 come	 as	 though	 from	my	 heart.	 In
addition	to	all	this,	I	haven’t	had	a	letter	from	you,	indeed	I	couldn’t
have	 expected	 one,	 since	 your	 letters	 always	 arrive	 by	 the	 second
mail,	and	there	is	no	second	delivery	on	Sundays,	so	at	best	I	shall	get
it	 tomorrow	morning,	 after	 the	 long	 night.—In	 these	 circumstances
and	as	a	small	compensation	for	all	this,	can	anyone	prevent	me	from
addressing	you	as	I	have	done	above?	And	isn’t	this	form	of	address	so
fitting,	in	part	and	in	its	entirety,	that,	once	used,	it	can	never	again
be	abandoned?
Dear	 Fräulein	 Felice,	 how	 have	 you	 spent	 this	 beautiful,	 terribly
short	 Sunday?	 If	 you	were	 one	 of	 those	 people	who	 are	 affected	 by
someone	 thinking	of	you,	you	would	have	woken	up	with	a	 start	 in
the	middle	of	the	night;	reading	in	bed	in	the	morning	the	lines	would
have	 become	 blurred;	 at	 breakfast	 your	 eyes	 would	 have	 strayed
beyond	 your	 cocoa	 and	 rolls,	 and	 even	 beyond	 your	 mother;	 the



orchids	you	were	taking	to	a	new	apartment	would	have	petrified	in
your	hand,	and	only	now	with	Schilling’s	Flight33	would	you	be	left	in
peace,	for	now	I	am	not	thinking	of	you,	rather	I	am	with	you.	Yet	I
am	not	with	you,	for	as	I	put	that	full	stop	I	heard	my	father,	who	had
just	 come	home,	 talking	 in	 the	next	 room,	divulging	 some	very	bad
business	news;	I	went	 in	and	 for	a	 few	moments	 stood	around	sadly
and	absentmindedly	with	my	father	and	mother.
In	the	last	few	days	I	have	thought	of	two	further	additions	to	the
evening	we	 spent	 together,	 the	 one	 I	 found	by	 chance	 in	 a	 letter	 of
yours,	the	other	I	thought	of	myself.
You	actually	told	me	then,	and	I	don’t	understand	how	I	could	have
forgotten,	that	staying	alone	in	a	hotel	made	you	feel	uncomfortable.	I
probably	 replied	 that	 I	 on	 the	 contrary	 felt	 very	much	 at	 ease	 in	 a
hotel	 room.	 This	 really	 is	 a	 fact;	 I	 noticed	 it	 particularly	 last	 year,
when	 I	had	 to	 travel	 for	 some	 time	 in	 the	depths	of	winter	 through
towns	 and	 villages	 in	 northern	 Bohemia.	 To	 have	 to	 oneself	 the
expanse	of	a	hotel	room	with	its	easily	surveyed	four	walls	and	a	door
that	 can	 be	 locked;	 the	 knowledge	 that	 specific	 items	 of	 one’s
belongings	 are	 tucked	 away	 into	 specific	 corners	 of	 cupboards,	 on
tables	and	coat	hangers,	always	gives	me	a	vague	sensation	of	a	new,
unspent	existence	charged	with	vigor	and	destined	 for	better	 things,
which	may	 of	 course	 be	 nothing	 but	 a	 despair	 driven	 beyond	 itself
and	 finding	 itself	at	home	 in	 the	cold	grave	of	a	hotel	 room.	 In	any
case,	I	have	always	felt	at	ease	in	them,	and	of	almost	all	hotel	rooms
I	 have	 stayed	 in	 I	 have	 nothing	 but	 good	 to	 report.	 On	 the	 whole
probably	 neither	 of	 us	 travels	 a	 great	 deal.	 But	 what	 about	 this
uneasiness	 that	 prevents	 you	 even	 from	 going	 up	 the	 stairs	 to	 your
apartment	alone	at	night?	Besides,	your	apartment	must	be	fairly	low,
or	 how	 could	 one	 hear	 people	 in	 the	 street	 clapping	 their	 hands	 (I
don’t	understand	how	one	can	hear	it	at	all	through	closed	windows)?
And	 you	 don’t	 want	 to	 face	 going	 up	 those	 few	 stairs	 by	 yourself?
You,	who	appear	so	calm	and	confident!	No,	I	can’t	be	satisfied	with
what	you	wrote	about	opening	the	front	door	to	the	house.
There	was	 also	 some	 talk	 that	 evening	 about	 the	 Yiddish	 theater.
Although	you	had	once	seen	a	performance	of	that	sort,	you	could	not
remember	 the	 name	 of	 the	 play.	 I	 believe	 that	 just	 now	 such	 a
company	 is	 playing	 in	 Berlin,	 and	 with	 them	 is	 my	 great	 friend,	 a
certain	Y.	Löwy.34	 Incidentally,	 it	was	 he	who	 during	 the	 long	wait
between	 your	 first	 and	 second	 letters,	 unintentionally	 but	 well
deserving	of	my	 thanks,	 sent	me	a	 little	news	of	you.	He	does	write



me	 very	 often	 and	 sends	me	 pictures,	 posters,	 newspaper	 clippings,
etc.	Once	he	sent	me	a	poster	of	 the	company’s	guest	appearance	 in
Leipzig.	I	left	it	lying	on	my	desk,	still	folded,	hardly	having	looked	at
it.	 But	 as	 is	 the	 way	 with	 things	 on	 desks,	 what’s	 at	 the	 bottom
sometimes	happens	to	appear	on	top,	and	so	one	day	this	very	poster
(and	 no	 other)	 was	 lying	 on	 top,	 and	 what’s	 more,	 unfolded!	 This
mere	chance	was	followed	by	another;	I	read	the	poster	carefully,	for
there	 are	 some	 quite	 amusing	 things	 on	 it	 (an	 actress,	married	 and
elderly—whom	 I	 greatly	 admire,	 by	 the	 way—is	 referred	 to	 as	 a
“primadonna,”	and	Löwy	even	calls	himself	a	“dramatist”),	but	down
in	 the	 corner,	 coming	 as	 a	 shock,	 I	 saw	 the	 name	 of	 the
Immanuelkirchstrasse	 in	 Berlin	 N.E.,	 where	 the	 poster	 was	 printed.
And	today,	out	of	gratitude—now	that	fortunately	I	don’t	have	to	be
content	with	such	news	of	you—I	wonder	whether	you	might	like	to
see	those	actors,	about	whom,	incidentally,	I	could	talk	to	you	by	the
hour.	I	am	not	absolutely	positive	that	they	are	playing	in	Berlin	now,
but	 according	 to	 a	 postcard	 from	 Löwy,	 which	 is	 lying	 around
somewhere	on	my	table,	I	think	I	can	assume	they	are.	I	feel	sure	you
would	like	this	man	very	much,	at	least	for	a	quarter	of	an	hour.	If	it
would	 amuse	 you,	 you	 could	 have	 him	 called	 out	 either	 before	 or
after	 the	 performance,	 gain	 his	 confidence	 by	 referring	 to	 me,	 and
listen	 to	him	 for	a	while.	 I	 love	 the	Yiddish	 theater;	 last	year	 I	may
have	gone	 to	20	of	 their	performances,	and	possibly	not	once	 to	 the
German	theater.—But	what	I	have	written	here	is	not	a	plea	for	you	to
go	there;	no,	honestly	it	isn’t.	You	have	better	theaters	in	Berlin,	and
perhaps,	 or	 most	 probably,	 the	 almost	 certain	 shabbiness	 of	 the
theater	itself	would	make	it	impossible	for	you	to	go	there.	I	even	feel
like	tearing	up	every	word	I	have	written	about	it,	 from	which	I	ask
you	to	conclude	that	I	by	no	means	advise	you	to	go.
And	am	I	to	end	that	part	of	Sunday	which	I	spend	writing	to	you

on	 this	 note?	 But	 it’s	 getting	 late,	 and	 later,	 and	 if	 I	 am	 to	 get	 any
sleep	 before	 my	 nightly	 stint,	 I	 shall	 have	 to	 hurry.	 One	 thing	 is
certain:	 I	 should	 not	 get	 any	 if	 it	 weren’t	 for	 this	 letter,	 however
unsatisfactory	it	may	be.
And	now	farewell.	That	wretched	post	office,	your	letter	may	have

been	in	Prague	all	day,	and	I	am	deprived	of	it!	Farewell.
Yours,	Franz	K.

It	is	now	past	midnight,	I	have	actually	done	nothing	but	correct



the	proofs;	I	haven’t	slept,	and	I	have	written	nothing	for	myself.
But	it	really	is	too	late	to	begin	now,	especially	since	I	have	not
slept,	 and	 so	 I	 shall	 go	 to	 bed	with	my	 suppressed	 restlessness,
and	fight	for	sleep.	You	must	have	been	asleep	for	some	time,	and
it	 is	 unfair	 of	 me	 to	 jeopardize	 your	 sleep	 with	 this	 little
postscript.	 But	 I	 have	 just	 glanced	 at	 your	 last	 letter	 again	 and
wonder	 whether	 you	 shouldn’t	 give	 up	 your	 work	 with	 the
professor.	I	still	don’t	know	what	kind	of	work	it	is,	but	even	if	he
were	 to	 dictate	 the	 most	 precious	 words	 night	 after	 night,	 it
wouldn’t	be	worth	while,	if	it	tired	you.	And	now	I	say	goodnight
to	you,	and	you	respond	with	your	even	breathing.

Yours,	Franz	K.

November	4,	1912
It	is	now	10:30	on	Monday	morning.	I	have	been	waiting	for	a	letter
since	10:30	on	Saturday	morning,	but	again	nothing	has	come.	I	have
written	every	day	(this	isn’t	in	the	least	a	reproach,	for	it	has	made	me
happy)	but	don’t	I	deserve	even	a	word?	One	single	word?	Even	if	it
were	 only	 to	 say	 “I	 never	want	 to	 hear	 from	 you	 again.”	 Besides,	 I
thought	 today’s	 letter	would	 contain	 some	 kind	 of	 decision,	 but	 the
nonarrival	 of	 a	 letter	 is	 also	 a	 little	 decision.	Had	a	 letter	 arrived,	 I
would	have	answered	it	at	once,	and	the	answer	would	be	bound	to
have	begun	with	 a	 complaint	 about	 the	 length	of	 those	 two	 endless
days.	But	you	leave	me	sitting	wretchedly	at	my	wretched	desk!

November	5,	1912
Dear	Fräulein	Felice,
If	you	always	want	me	to	write	about	things	as	they	really	are,	then
you	will	find	it	easy	to	forgive	yesterday’s	wicked,	superfluous,	panic-
stricken	 letter,	 for	 things	were	 in	 fact	word	 for	word	 as	written	 on
that	scrap	of	paper.	Today	of	course	your	last	two	letters	arrived,	one
early,	 the	other	at	10;	 I	have	no	 right	whatever	 to	complain,	 I	 even
have	the	promise	of	a	letter	every	day	(hark,	my	heart,	a	letter	every
day!)	and	must	be	thankful	if	you	forgive	me.	I	 just	want	to	implore
you,	when	you	have	finished	a	letter	to	me,	don’t	make	me	suffer	for
your	 not	 happening	 to	 have	 a	 stamp;	 just	 drop	 it	 recklessly	 in	 the
mailbox	without	a	stamp.
The	pity	is	that	unless	it’s	a	Sunday	I	can	hardly	ever	write	to	you



except	during	my	dullest	hours,	between	3	and	4	o’clock.	It	is	seldom
possible	 in	 the	office—how	 I	have	 to	 restrain	myself	 after	 reading	a
letter	 from	 you!—but	 if	 I	 were	 not	 to	 write	 to	 you	 now,	 my
dissatisfaction	would	allow	me	no	sleep	at	all,	nor	would	you	get	my
letter	 the	 following	 day—and	 in	 the	 evening	 my	 timetable	 is	 too
crowded.
Anyway	I	gather	from	your	letter	that	even	on	holidays	I	write	in	an
unreasonable	way.	My	heart	may	be	comparatively	sound,	but	for	any
human	heart	to	stand	up	to	the	sorrows	of	bad	writing	and	the	joys	of
good	writing	 is	 not	 easy.	 I	was	 in	 sanatoria	 only	 on	 account	 of	my
stomach	 and	my	general	weakness,	 not	 forgetting	my	 self-enamored
hypochondria.	One	day	I	shall	have	to	write	at	length	about	all	this.
No,	I	don’t	believe	famous	doctors;	 I	believe	doctors	only	when	they
tell	 me	 that	 they	 don’t	 know	 anything,	 and	 anyway	 I	 hate	 them	 (I
hope	you	don’t	love	one).	I	would	gladly	have	a	free,	peaceful	life	in
Berlin	prescribed	for	me,	but	where	is	a	doctor	with	such	authority	to
be	found?	And	the	Immanuel-Kirchstrasse	must	be	the	very	place	for
tired	 people.	 I	 can	 describe	 it	 to	 you.	 Listen:	 “From	 the	 Alexander
Platz	 you	 follow	 a	 long	 but	 not	 very	 busy	 street,	 Prenzloer	 Strasse,
Prenzloer	Allee,	with	many	narrow	side	streets.	One	of	these	streets	is
the	 Immanuel-Kirchstrasse.	 Quiet,	 secluded,	 far	 from	 the	 constant
bustle	of	Berlin.	The	first	building	in	this	street	is	an	ordinary	church.
Opposite	stands	house	No.	37,	very	narrow	and	high.	The	street	is	also
very	narrow.	When	I’m	there,	it’s	always	calm,	quiet,	and	I	ask	myself:
Is	this	still	Berlin?”	This	is	how	the	actor	Löwy	describes	your	street	in
a	 letter	 I	 received	yesterday.	The	 last	question	I	 find	poetic,	and	the
whole	 thing	a	 faithful	description.	 I	asked	him	for	 it	 some	time	ago,
without	 giving	 a	 reason,	 and	 he	 wrote	 to	 me	 in	 similar	 fashion,
without	further	questions.	As	a	matter	of	fact,	I	really	wanted	to	hear
about	 No.	 30	 (and	 now	 I	 discover	 you’re	 at	 No.	 29,	 if	 I’m	 not
mistaken);	 I	 don’t	 know	why	 he	 chose	No.	 37	 for	me.	 But	 come	 to
think	 of	 it:	 the	 printers	 of	 that	 poster	 may	 be	 in	 that	 building.
According	to	this	last	letter	it	seems	that	the	company	gave	their	last
Berlin	 performance	 on	 Sunday,	 but	 as	 far	 as	 I	 can	 gather	 from	 the
letter,	there	may	be	another	performance	next	Sunday.	I	tell	you	this
simply	to	correct	my	earlier	statement,	and	with	all	the	reservations	I
made	when	I	suggested	a	visit	to	this	theater.
Incidentally,	 the	magic	word	appeared	 in	your	 last	 letter	but	one,
and	 doesn’t	 know	 it.	 It	 is	 lost	 there	 among	many	 others,	 and	 I	 fear
that	in	our	letters	it	will	never	achieve	the	position	it	deserves,	for	on



no	account	will	 I	say	it	 first,	and	you	of	course,	even	if	you	were	to
guess	 it,	would	not	be	 the	 first	 to	utter	 it.	 Just	as	well,	perhaps,	 for
after	 this	word	 had	 had	 its	 effect,	 you	would	 discover	 in	me	 things
you	could	not	like,	and	what	should	I	do	then?
Above	all,	 you	would	 take	a	different	view	of	my	writing	and	my

attitude	 to	writing,	 and	would	no	 longer	advise	moderation.	Human
weakness	 alone	 provides	 enough	moderation.	 Shouldn’t	 I	 stake	 all	 I
have	on	the	one	thing	I	can	do?	What	a	hopeless	fool	I	should	be	if	I
didn’t!	My	writing	may	be	worthless;	 in	which	 case,	 I	 am	definitely
and	without	doubt	utterly	worthless.	If	I	spare	myself	in	this	respect,	I
am	not	 really	 sparing	myself,	 I	 am	 committing	 suicide.	 By	 the	way,
how	old	do	you	think	I	am?	There	may	have	been	some	talk	about	it
that	evening,	I	don’t	know,	but	perhaps	you	did	not	notice.
Farewell,	go	on	feeling	well	disposed	toward	me,	and	keep	putting

aside	unfinished	letters	 to	Frau	Sophie.	 I	 like	Frau	F[riedmann]	very
much,	 but	 not	 enough	 to	 let	 her	 have	 your	 letters.	 No,	 we	 don’t
correspond.	 I	have	written	her	only	3	 letters,	 the	 first:	 complaint	on
your	account;	the	second:	anxiety	on	your	account;	the	third:	thanks
on	your	account.	Adieu!

Yours,	Franz	K.

[LETTERHEAD:	Workers’	Accident	Insurance	Institute]
October	[November]	6,	1912

Dear	 Fräulein	 Felice,	 you	 are	 being	 torn	 to	 pieces	 before	 my	 very
eyes!	Don’t	you	see	too	many	people,	unnecessarily	many?	It	wouldn’t
matter	in	the	least	if	you	had	more	time.	Don’t	you	do	some	jobs,	pay
visits,	go	to	certain	parties,	which	result	in	nothing	but	restlessness?	I
am	being	rather	professorial,	without	knowing	or	understanding	much
about	 the	 situation,	 but	 in	 your	 last	 letter	 you	 sounded	 so	 nervous
that	 one	 longed	 to	 seize	 your	 hand	 for	 a	moment.	 I	 am	not	 against
anything	 specific,	 not	 against	 the	 pleasant	 temptations	 at	 the
professor’s	(although	I	did	raise	an	eyebrow	at	the	“water	and	gas”),
nor	against	the	anniversary	celebration—by	the	way,	at	these	parties
group	photographs	are	often	taken;	they	can	easily	be	handed	out	as
presents	without	specifically	offering	a	photograph	of	oneself,	and	at
the	 same	 time	 give	 great	 pleasure	 to	 someone	 far	 away,	 if	 one	 so
wishes.
What	I	said	about	the	Yiddish	theater	was	certainly	not	meant	to	be



ironical;	 I	may	have	 laughed	at	 it,	 but	 that	 is	 part	 of	 loving.	 I	 even
made	a	short	 introductory	speech	 in	 front	of	what	now	seems	 like	a
countless	 number	 of	 people;	 then	 Löwy	 came	 on,	 acted,	 sang,	 and
recited.35	 Unfortunately	 the	 money	 they	 made	 from	 this	 countless
number	 was	 not	 correspondingly	 uncountable.	 Of	 the	 Berlin
performance	I	know	no	more	than	when	I	wrote	yesterday,	for	Löwy’s
last	 letter	 contained	nothing	but	 complaints	 and	despair.	One	of	 his
complaints—the	 impossibility	 of	 earning	 any	 money	 in	 Berlin	 on
weekdays—is	 a	 reproach	 I	 must	 not	 conceal	 from	 a	 Berliner.	 Apart
from	 this,	 Löwy,	 given	his	way,	 is	 a	man	of	 continuous	 enthusiasm,
known	in	Eastern	Europe	as	a	“hot	Jew.”	At	the	moment,	however,	he
is	 for	 several	 reasons—although	 far	 from	boring,	 too	 long	a	 story	 to
tell	here—terribly	unhappy,	and	the	worst	of	it	is	that	I	have	no	idea
how	to	help	him.
Why	I	hoped	to	get	your	letter	on	Sunday	is	easy	to	explain.	I	just
went	 to	 the	office	 to	 look,	but	at	 first	 I	wasn’t	 really	disappointed.	 I
thumbed	through	the	mail	absentmindedly	rather	than	hopefully.	My
home	address	 is	Niklasstrasse	36.	But	what,	please,	 is	yours?	On	the
backs	of	your	letters	I	have	seen	three	different	addresses.	Is	it	in	fact
No.	29?	Does	 it	annoy	you	to	get	registered	letters?	I	send	them	not
only	 because	 I	 am	 anxious,	 though	 that	 is	 one	 of	 the	 reasons,	 but
because	I	feel	they	are	more	likely	to	come	straight	to	you,	instead	of
aimlessly	 shuttling	 about,	 like	 those	 ordinary	 letters	 that	 sadly	 ply
their	 way;	 and	 I	 always	 imagine	 the	 outstretched	 hand	 of	 a	 smart
Berlin	mailman	who,	 if	 necessary,	would	 force	 the	 letter	 upon	 you,
even	 if	 you	were	 to	 resist.	A	dependent	man	 cannot	have	 too	many
allies.—Farewell!	 I	 am	 proud	 that	 this	 letter	 contains	 not	 a	 single
complaint,	nice	as	it	may	be	to	complain	to	you.

Yours,	Franz	K.

[LETTERHEAD:	Workers’	Accident	Insurance	Institute]
November	7,	1912

Dear	Fräulein	Felice,
Yesterday	 I	 pretended	 to	be	worried	 about	 you,	 and	 tried	hard	 to
give	 you	 advice.	 But	 instead	 what	 am	 I	 doing?	 Tormenting	 you?	 I
don’t	mean	 intentionally,	 that	would	 be	 inconceivable,	 yet	 even	 if	 I
were	 it	 would	 have	 evaporated,	 faced	 by	 your	 last	 letter,	 like	 evil
faced	 by	 good,	 but	 I	 am	 tormenting	 you	 by	my	 existence,	my	 very



existence.	 Fundamentally	 I	 am	 unchanged,	 keep	 turning	 in	 circles,
have	 acquired	 but	 one	more	 unfulfilled	 longing	 to	 add	 to	my	 other
unfulfilled	 ones;	 and	 a	 new	 kind	 of	 self-confidence,	 perhaps	 the
strongest	I	ever	had,	has	been	given	to	me	within	my	general	sense	of
lostness.	But	you	are	restless	and	disturbed,	you	cry	 in	your	dreams,
which	is	worse	than	lying	awake	and	staring	at	the	ceiling,	you	have
changed	since	 that	evening	when	you	 looked	at	everyone	so	calmly;
now	you	flit	from	one	thing	to	another,	in	one	letter	you	mention	20
people,	in	another	none.	In	short,	the	gains	are	unjustly,	most	unjustly
distributed	between	us.	(What	are	you	doing,	sitting	opposite	me	now
in	this	quiet	room,	even	though	it	does	belong	to	you!)
I	 repeat:	 the	 fault	 lies	 not	 within	me—what	 am	 I,	 after	 all?—the
fault	 lies	 in	 the	 one	 thing	 to	 which	 my	 unconscious	 striving	 has
always	been	and	still	 is	directed,	a	direction	in	which	it	has	to	drive
you	 too	 if	 it	 is	 not	 to	 lose	 you.	 Oh,	 what	 a	 dismal	 outrage	 I	 am
condemned	to	commit	upon	your	nature!
After	a	 long	 interruption	 (If	only	 I	had	 time,	 if	 only	 I	had	 time!	 I
would	be	calm	and	see	things	in	the	right	perspective.	I	would	know
how	to	write	to	you	more	carefully.	I	would	never	offend	you	as	I	am
doing	now,	though	there	is	nothing	I	would	rather	avoid.	I	would	be
calm,	would	not	tremble	over	my	files	at	the	thought	of	you,	as	I	did	a
few	 moments	 ago	 at	 my	 office,	 nor	 would	 I	 be	 sitting	 now	 in	 the
comparative	 quiet	 of	 this	 room,	 staring	 apathetically	 out	 of	 the
window	 through	 half-drawn	 curtains.	 And	 even	 if	we	 go	 on	writing
each	 other	 every	 day,	 will	 there	 be	 days	 other	 than	 today,	 and	 a
destiny	 other	 than	 to	 pursue	 the	 impossible,	 to	 be	 torn	 asunder	 by
force,	and	by	the	same	force	to	be	held	together?)
I	 could	 only	 mention	 the	 interruption,	 nothing	 else.	 It	 is	 now
afternoon,	even	late	afternoon.	On	re-reading	your	letter,	it	occurs	to
me	that	I	know	nothing	whatever	about	your	early	life;	I	can	only	just
disentangle	your	face	from	the	ivy	out	of	which	you	peered	across	the
fields	when	you	were	a	little	girl.	There	is	hardly	any	way	of	finding
out	other	than	through	the	written	word.	Make	no	mistake	about	that.
If	I	arrived	in	person	you	would	find	me	insufferable.	What	I	was	like
on	 the	way	 to	 the	 hotel:	 that’s	me.	My	mode	 of	 life,	 though	 it	 has
cured	 my	 stomach,	 would	 seem	 to	 you	 crazy	 and	 intolerable.	 For
months	 on	 end,	 until	 he	 grew	used	 to	 it,	my	 father	 had	 to	 hide	 his
face	behind	 the	newspaper	while	 I	 ate	my	 supper.36	 For	 some	years
now	my	 clothes	 have	 been	 very	 untidy.	 The	 same	 suit	 does	 for	 the
office,	the	street,	my	desk	at	home—yes,	even	for	summer	and	winter.



I	 can	 stand	up	 to	 the	 cold	 almost	better	 than	a	 chunk	of	wood,	but
that	 in	 itself	would	hardly	be	 a	 reason	 for	 going	 about	 as	 I	 do—for
example,	even	now	in	November,	not	wearing	an	overcoat,	neither	a
light	 nor	 a	 heavy	 one,	 walking	 around	 among	 well-wrapped
pedestrians	like	a	lunatic	in	a	summer	suit	and	little	summer	hat,	on
principle	without	a	vest	 (I	 am	 the	 inventor	of	vestless	 attire);	 as	 for
the	 indescribable	 peculiarities	 of	 my	 linen,	 the	 less	 said	 the	 better.
Imagine	the	shock	you’d	get	if,	near	the	church	which	I	picture	at	the
beginning	of	your	 street,	you	were	 to	 run	 into	 such	a	person!	There
are	several	explanations	for	my	habits	(apart	from	the	fact	that	I	am
incomparably	 healthier	 since	 I	 adopted	 them),	 but	 you	 wouldn’t
accept	 a	 single	 one,	 above	 all	 because	 anything	 healthy	 about	 my
mode	 of	 life	 (needless	 to	 say,	 I	 neither	 smoke	 nor	 drink	 alcohol,
coffee,	 or	 tea,	 and	 as	 a	 rule—and	 this	 atones	 for	 my	 hypocritical
silence—I	 eat	 no	 chocolate	 either)	 is	 undermined	 by	 lack	 of	 sleep.
Dearest	Fräulein	Felice,	please	don’t	turn	your	back	on	me	for	all	that,
nor	try	to	improve	me	in	this	respect,	but	tolerate	me	in	a	kindly	way
across	this	great	distance.	For	you	see,	last	night	for	example,	I	came
in	 from	the	 freezing	cold	 in	my	usual	attire,	 sat	down	 to	my	supper
(which	hardly	varies	from	day	to	day),	listened	to	my	brother-in-law
and	 to	 the	 one	 who	 will	 soon	 acquire	 that	 status;	 then,	 while
goodbyes	were	being	said	in	the	hall	(I	now	have	supper	between	9:30
and	 10),	 I	 was	 left	 alone	 in	 the	 room	 and	 was	 seized	 with	 such
longing	for	you	that	all	I	wanted	to	do	was	lay	my	head	on	the	table
for	some	kind	of	support.
You	 take	 me	 for	 much	 younger	 than	 I	 am,	 I	 almost	 feel	 like

concealing	my	years,	for	their	great	number	only	emphasizes	all	that
disturbs	you	about	me.	Actually	 I	am	almost	a	year	older	 than	Max,
and	 will	 be	 30	 on	 July	 3rd.	 I	 do	 look	 like	 a	 boy,	 however,	 and
depending	on	the	perspicacity	of	the	uninitiated	onlooker	I	am	taken
for	anything	between	18	and	25.
Yesterday	 I	 said	 something	 about	 the	 professor	 that	 could	 be

interpreted	 as	 arrogance—shish,	 it	 is	 nothing	 but	 jealousy.	 It’s	 only
today	that,	to	my	way	of	thinking,	at	least,	I	have	something	against
him,	since	he	advises	you	to	read	Binding.37	I	know	only	very	little	of
his	work,	but	I	haven’t	read	a	line	that	isn’t	false	and	highfalutin.	And
this	 is	what	he	 sends	 into	your	dreams!—And	now	quickly:	Why	do
you	jump	off	running	trams?	Next	time	you	try,	my	look	of	horror	will
rise	 before	 your	 eyes.	And	 the	 oculist?	And	 your	 headaches?	Unless
your	next	letter	starts	with	answers	to	these	questions,	I	won’t	read	it.



Yours,	Franz	K.

November	8,	1912
Dear	Fräulein	Felice,
Your	last	letter	but	two	(not	as	you	say	your	“last	letters”)	confused
me;	 it	 really	 did,	 but	 I	 didn’t	 know	 it	 had	 been	 as	 bad	 as	 your	 last
letter	now	makes	me	believe.	Am	I	really	so	unsure	of	myself?	And	my
hidden	 impatience,	 my	 incurable	 dissatisfaction,	 do	 they	 tremble
visibly	in	the	strokes	of	my	pen?	And	must	I	let	myself	be	told	by	my
own	letters	what	I	mean?	How	dismal	everything	around	me	is!	And	I
am	trying	to	drag	you	into	this	with	all	my	might!
I	 don’t	 know	 if	 you	 have	 a	 true	 picture	 of	my	 life,	 which	would
enable	 you	 to	 comprehend	 my	 sensibility,	 that	 irritability	 which	 is
always	at	 the	ready,	but	which,	once	 it	has	been	set	 free,	 leaves	me
behind	like	a	stone.	I	have	read	your	letter	at	least	20	times,	several
times	immediately	after	its	arrival;	several	times	while	in	front	of	the
typewriter;	 then,	while	 a	 client	was	 sitting	 at	my	 desk,	 I	 read	 your
letter	as	though	I	had	just	received	it;	I	read	it	in	the	street,	and	now
at	home.	But	I	don’t	know	what	to	do,	and	feel	powerless.	Were	I	with
you	I	would	remain	silent;	but	since	we	are	separated,	I	must	write,	or
I	shall	die	of	grief.	Who	knows	whether	I	don’t	need	the	touch	of	that
hand	more	than	you	do,	not	the	hand	that	soothes,	but	the	hand	that
gives	strength.	Yesterday	my	weariness	was	so	intense	I	was	ready	to
die,	and	after	many	indecisions	decided	to	abandon	writing	during	the
night.	Instead,	I	walked	the	streets	for	two	hours,	returning	home	only
when	my	hands	were	 frozen	stiff	 in	my	pockets.	Then	 I	 slept	solidly
for	 nearly	 6	 hours,	 and	 have	 only	 a	 vague	 recollection	 of	 a	 dream,
involving	you	and	some	unhappy	incident.	This	is	the	first	time	I	have
dreamt	of	you	and	remembered	it—which	reminds	me:	the	only	time	I
woke	 during	 the	 night,	 and	 then	 only	 for	 a	moment,	was	 from	 this
dream.	 In	 the	 morning	 I	 was	 awakened	 before	 the	 usual	 hour;	 our
governess38	 came	 storming	 into	 the	 apartment,	 and	 with	 a	 scream,
which	 sounded	 in	my	half-awake	 state	 like	a	 truly	maternal	 scream,
she	announced	that	soon	after	midnight	my	sister	had	given	birth	to	a
girl.39	 I	 stayed	 in	 bed	 a	 little	 longer—even	 in	 cases	 of	 emergency	 I
can’t	be	 forcibly	woken	up,	what	does	wake	me	 is	 the	general	noise
behind	 every	 door—trying	 to	 understand	 our	 governess’	 friendly
interest	 in	 this	 birth,	 since	 I,	 the	 brother	 and	 uncle,	 felt	 not	 the
slightest	amity—only	envy,	nothing	but	passionate	envy	of	my	sister,



or	rather	of	my	brother-in-law,	 for	 I	 shall	never	have	a	child;	 this	 is
even	 more	 certain	 than—(I	 will	 not	 needlessly	 mention	 a	 greater
misfortune).
So	 this	 is	 how	 cheerful	 I	 am	 after	 a	 good	 night’s	 sleep	 and	 an
evening	wasted	through	absurd	caution.	Dearest	Fräulein	Felice!

Yours,	Franz	K.

On	the	back	of	a	sample	page	of	“Children	on	a	Country	Road”40

November	8,	1912
Dear	Fräulein	Felice,
I	 can’t	get	any	writing	paper	now,	at	12:30	at	night,	because	 it	 is
next	door	and	my	sister	is	asleep	in	that	room;	things	in	the	apartment
are	rather	upside	down	because	our	grandson	and	nephew,	owing	to
the	birth	of	his	sister,	is	staying	with	us.	That’s	why	I	am	writing	on
this	proof,	which	also	gives	you	a	type	sample	of	my	little	book.
Now	listen,	dearest	Fräulein,	I	feel	that	my	words	become	clearer	in
the	silence	of	the	night.	Let	us	forget	about	this	afternoon’s	letter,	as	a
letter,	 and	 remember	 it	 as	 a	warning.	 But	 only	 in	 the	 best	 of	 good
will.	I	shall	never	forget	the	horror	of	this	afternoon	after	finishing	my
letter	to	you,	though	things	were	bad	enough	in	the	course	of	writing
it.	 This	 is	 what	 I’m	 like	 when	 I	 have	 done	 no	 writing	 of	 my	 own
(though,	 needless	 to	 say,	 this	was	 not	 the	 only	 contributing	 factor).
When	 I	 live	 only	 for	 myself	 and	 for	 those	 who	 are	 indifferent,
familiar,	or	merely	present,	who	by	their	 indifference,	 familiarity,	or
merely	 by	 their	 powerful	 and	 lively	 presence,	 compensate	 for	 my
inadequacy,	 then	 I	am	not	so	much	aware	of	 it.	But	when	I	want	 to
draw	close	 to	 someone,	 and	 fully	 commit	myself,	 then	my	misery	 is
assured.	Then	 I	 am	nothing,	 and	what	 can	 I	 do	with	nothingness?	 I
must	 admit	 that	 your	 letter	 this	 morning	 (by	 the	 afternoon	 it	 had
changed)	arrived	at	just	the	right	moment;	I	was	in	need	of	those	very
words.
But	 I	 realize	 I	 have	 not	 yet	 recovered:	 my	 writing	 is	 not	 lucid
enough;	even	this	letter	would	deserve	your	reproach.	Let	us	trust	in
sleep,	and	in	the	gods.
How	do	you	like	the	type	sample	(needless	to	say,	the	paper	will	be
different)?	No	doubt	the	typeface	is	a	little	too	consciously	beautiful,
and	would	 be	more	 appropriate	 to	 the	 tablets	 of	Moses	 than	 to	my



little	prevarications.41	But	now	it’s	being	printed	that	way.
Farewell!	I	need	more	kindness	than	I	deserve.

Yours,	Franz	K.

Draft	of	a	letter	to	Felice	Bauer,	November	9,	191242
Dearest	Fräulein	Felice,	you	are	not	 to	write	 to	me	again,	nor	will	 I
write	 to	you.	 I	would	be	bound	 to	make	you	unhappy	by	writing	 to
you,	and	as	for	me	I	am	beyond	help.	To	realize	this	I	need	not	have
counted	 the	 striking	 of	 the	 clock	 all	 through	 the	 night;	 I	 was	 well
aware	 of	 it	 before	 writing	 my	 first	 letter	 to	 you.	 If	 I	 attempted,
nevertheless,	to	tie	myself	to	you	I	should	deserve	to	be	cursed,	were	I
not	cursed	already.—If	you	want	me	to	return	your	letters,	of	course	I
shall	do	so,	much	as	I	should	like	to	keep	them.	But	 if	you	insist	on
having	them,	send	me	a	blank	postcard	as	a	sign	that	you	do.	I	on	the
other	hand	beg	you	to	keep	my	letters.—Now	quickly	forget	the	ghost
that	I	am,	and	go	on	living	happily	and	peacefully	as	before.

November	11,	1912
Dearest	Fräulein	Felice,
Thank	 God!	 I	 say	 so	 too.	 If	 you	 knew	 how	 I	 spent	 Friday	 and

Saturday,	 and	 in	 particular	 the	 night	 from	 Friday	 to	 Saturday!
Honestly,	I	didn’t	fail	to	count	a	single	stroke	of	the	clock	as	it	struck
each	quarter-hour.	In	the	afternoon	I	wrote	the	last	letter	but	one,	in
utter	and	 imperative	 self-torture;	 then	 I	had	 to	go	out	and	didn’t	 lie
down	till	comparatively	late.	It	is	possible—I	don’t	remember	exactly
—that	 I	went	 to	 sleep	 from	 sheer	misery.	 In	 the	 evening	 I	managed
three	 or	 four	 pages	 of	 my	 own	 writing,	 which	 were	 not	 too	 bad;	 I
asked	myself	in	vain	where	such	resources	of	calmness	could	still	exist
within	 myself	 from	 which	 those	 words	 had	 flown,	 while	 I	 was
excluded	from	tranquility.	Later	I	thought	I	had	become	a	whole	man
again	 and	 wrote	 that	 letter	 on	 the	 proof,	 but	 inadvertently	 it	 once
more	 turned	 into	 something	 evil,	 and	 I	 stared	 at	 it	 as	 though	 I	 had
received	 it	 rather	 than	 written	 it.	 I	 then	 lay	 down	 and	 fell	 asleep
surprisingly	soon,	though	only	very	lightly.	But	fifteen	minutes	later	I
was	 awake	 again;	 half-dreaming,	 I	 thought	 I	 heard	 a	 knock	 (I	 have
now	got	to	attend	to	an	urgent,	horrible,	age-old	matter	that	has	been
hanging	over	me	for	a	week	and	I	will	not	allow	myself	to	give	you	a
single	 thought;	you	must	assist	me,	 then	perhaps	as	a	reward	 I	 shall



have	 a	 free	moment	 and	 the	 peace	 to	 finish	 this	 letter,	which	 is	 as
much	a	part	of	me	as	the	beating	of	my	heart	and	which	entirely	fills
my	head,	as	though	I	were	not	sitting	in	an	office	which	has	bought
half	my	days	and	more,	and	which	makes	seemingly	justified	demands
upon	me	at	all	 times;	 it’s	 fortunate	enough	 that	 less	 important	work
vanishes	 from	 my	 sleepy	 eyes—but	 no	 more	 writing	 now,	 start
working.)
The	reward	failed	to	materialize,	work	drives	me	this	way	and	that,
and	 so	 do	my	 thoughts	 of	 you,	 but	 in	 different	 directions.	 Today	 I
received	 your	 last	 three	 letters	 almost	 at	 the	 same	 time.	 Your
goodness	 is	 infinite.	 I	 shall	 now	 send	 this	 letter	 as	 it	 is;	 I	 shall
probably	write	several	times	again	today.	I	will	explain	in	detail	why	I
did	not	write	yesterday.	I	shall	mail	this	letter	as	it	is,	for	it	makes	me
unhappy	to	think	that	a	letter	of	mine	is	not	at	least	on	its	way	to	you.
So	farewell	for	only	a	few	hours.

Yours,	Franz	K.

November	11,	1912
Dearest	Fräulein	Felice,
So	I	haven’t	lost	you	after	all.	And	I	was	quite	convinced	I	had.	The
letter	 in	 which	 you	 described	 one	 of	 my	 letters	 as	 alien	 to	 you,
horrified	me.	I	saw	in	it	the	unintentional,	and	therefore	all	the	more
decisive	 confirmation	 of	 doom,	 which	 recently	 in	 particular	 I	 had
thought	largely	to	have	escaped,	but	to	which,	with	a	final	blow,	I	had
once	more	to	submit.	I	was	beside	myself,	I	didn’t	know	how	to	write
to	 you;	 the	 two	 Saturday	 letters	 were	 contrived	 from	 beginning	 to
end,	the	only	element	of	truth	was	my	conviction	that	everything	had
come	to	an	end.—Can	it	have	a	special	meaning	that	now,	at	this	very
word,	my	mother	should	come	into	my	room	crying,	dissolved	in	tears
(she	 is	about	 to	go	 to	 the	 shop,	 she	 is	at	 the	 shop	all	day,	has	been
every	day	for	the	last	30	years),	that	she	caresses	me,	wants	to	know
what’s	the	matter	with	me,	why	I	don’t	talk	at	meals	(but	I	have	not
talked	 for	 a	 long	 time,	 simply	 to	 keep	 a	 hold	 on	myself),	 and	 a	 lot
more	 besides.	 Poor	 Mother!	 But	 I	 comforted	 her	 in	 a	 very	 sensible
way,	 kissed	her,	 and	 finally	made	her	 smile.	 I	 even	managed	 to	 get
her,	with	eyes	half-dry,	to	give	me	a	fairly	thorough	scolding	for	going
without	my	afternoon	 snack	 (a	practice	acquired	years	ago).	 I	know
(she	doesn’t	know	that	 I	know,	or	rather	 that	 I	discovered	 later)	 the



cause	of	her	extreme	anxiety	about	me.	But	more	of	this	some	other
time.
Again	 there	 is	 so	much	 I	want	 to	 tell	 you,	 I	 don’t	 know	where	 to
begin.	And	yet	I	think	of	these	last	three	days	as	heralds	of	unhappy,
ever-present	 possibilities,	 and	 never	 again	will	 I	write	 an	 important
letter	on	a	restless	working	day.	You	must	agree,	and	not	be	cross	or
reproach	me.	For	I	am	now	in	the	mood,	whether	you	like	it	or	not,	to
throw	myself	at	your	feet,	to	give	myself	to	you	so	completely	that	no
trace,	 no	 memory	 of	 me	 is	 left	 for	 anyone	 else;	 but	 never	 again,
whether	right	or	wrong,	do	I	wish	to	hear	another	remark	like	the	one
in	that	letter.	This	is	not	the	only	reason	why	I	am	going	to	write	only
short	letters	from	now	on	(on	Sundays,	however,	I	shall	always	allow
myself	 the	 luxury	of	an	enormous	 letter),	but	also	because	I	want	to
spend	every	ounce	of	myself	on	my	novel,	which	after	all	belongs	to
you	as	well,	or	rather	it	should	give	you	a	clearer	idea	of	the	good	in
me	 than	 the	mere	hints	 in	 the	 longest	 letters	of	 the	 longest	 lifetime.
The	story	I	am	writing,	designed,	I	fear,	in	such	a	manner	that	it	will
never	be	completed,	is	called,	to	give	you	an	approximate	idea,	“The
Man	Who	Disappeared,”	and	takes	place	entirely	in	the	United	States
of	America.43	 So	 far	5	 chapters	 are	 completed,	 the	6th	almost.	Here
are	the	chapter	headings:	 I.	The	Stoker;	 II.	The	Uncle;	 III.	A	Country
House	 Near	 New	 York;	 IV.	 The	March	 to	 Rameses;	 V.	 In	 the	 Hotel
Occidental;	VI.	The	Case	of	Robinson.—I	have	listed	these	headings	as
if	 they	could	convey	something,	which	of	course	 is	 impossible,	but	 I
want	them	to	be	in	your	safekeeping	until	this	does	become	possible.
After	15	years	of	despairing	effort	 (except	 for	 rare	moments),	 this	 is
the	 first	 major	 work	 in	 which,	 for	 the	 past	 6	 weeks,	 I	 have	 felt
confidence.	It	must	be	completed,	as	I	feel	sure	you	will	agree,	and	so,
with	 your	 blessing,	 I	 would	 like	 to	 transfer	 the	 brief	 periods	 I
otherwise	 spend	 on	 writing	 inaccurate,	 alarmingly	 incomplete,
imprudent,	dangerous	letters	to	you,	to	this	task	around	which,	until
now	at	any	rate,	everything,	no	matter	what	and	from	where	it	came,
has	calmed	down	and	taken	the	right	turning.	Do	you	agree?	And	you
won’t	abandon	me	to	the	terrible	loneliness	I	feel	in	spite	of	all	this?
Dearest	Fräulein	Felice,	what	would	I	not	give	to	be	able	to	look	into
your	eyes	at	this	moment!

On	Sunday	I	will	answer	every	question	with	the	utmost	intelligence,
including	the	one	about	not	having	written	yesterday,	which	is	a	very
long	story.



If	one	hasn’t	visited	the	oculist	on	account	of	sore	eyes,	one	must	say
so	explicitly!
For	three	days	now	I	have	denied	myself	the	pleasure	of	jumping	off
running	trams,	for	fear	that	by	some	kind	of	telepathy	you	might	then
fail	to	take	my	warning	seriously	enough.	Now	that	I	have	your	firm
promise	 at	 last,	 I	 can	 jump	 again—which	 reminds	me	 of	 something
that	 happened	 on	 Saturday.	 I	 was	 out	 walking	 with	 Max	 and
described	myself	as	not	exactly	the	happiest	of	men.	 I	wasn’t	paying
much	attention	to	where	I	was	going,	and	a	carriage	only	just	missed
me.	Still	 deep	 in	 thought,	 I	 stamped	my	 foot	 and	uttered	 something
inarticulate.	 At	 that	 moment	 I	 felt	 downright	 furious	 that	 I	 hadn’t
been	 run	 over.	 Needless	 to	 say,	 the	 coachman	 misunderstood	 and
swore	at	me—quite	rightly.
No,	I	don’t	live	completely	withdrawn	from	my	family.	Proof	of	this
lies	 in	 the	 enclosed	 description	 of	 the	 acoustic	 conditions	 in	 our
apartment,	which	has	just	appeared	in	a	local	Prague	periodical	as	a
mild	public	 chastisement	 of	my	 family.44	 Furthermore,	my	youngest
sister	(just	over	20)	is	my	best	friend	in	Prague,	and	the	other	two	are
both	 sympathetic	and	kind.	 It’s	only	my	 father	and	 I	who	hate	each
other	gallantly.
How	good	it	sounds	to	be	addressed	by	you	as	Du,	even	if	it	is	only
part	of	a	quotation!
Now	 quickly,	 before	 I	 close:	 please	 suggest	 a	 remedy	 to	 stop	me
trembling	with	joy	like	a	lunatic	when	I	receive	and	read	your	letters
at	the	office,	something	that	would	allow	me	to	do	my	work	and	not
get	thrown	out.	It	should	be	possible	to	read	them	calmly,	don’t	you
think?	 And	 then	 forget	 them	 for	 a	 few	 hours.	 I	 should	 be	 able	 to
achieve	this.

Yours,	Franz

November	11,	1912
Fräulein	Felice!
I	am	now	going	 to	ask	you	a	 favor	which	sounds	quite	crazy,	and
which	I	should	regard	as	such,	were	I	the	one	to	receive	the	letter.	It
is	also	the	very	greatest	test	that	even	the	kindest	person	could	be	put
to.	Well,	this	is	it:
Write	to	me	only	once	a	week,	so	that	your	letter	arrives	on	Sunday
—for	 I	 cannot	endure	your	daily	 letters,	 I	 am	 incapable	of	 enduring



them.	 For	 instance,	 I	 answer	 one	 of	 your	 letters,	 then	 lie	 in	 bed	 in
apparent	 calm,	 but	 my	 heart	 beats	 through	 my	 entire	 body	 and	 is
conscious	only	of	you.	I	belong	to	you;45	there	is	really	no	other	way
of	expressing	it,	and	that	is	not	strong	enough.	But	for	this	very	reason
I	don’t	want	to	know	what	you	are	wearing;	it	confuses	me	so	much
that	I	cannot	deal	with	life;	and	that’s	why	I	don’t	want	to	know	that
you	are	fond	of	me.	If	I	did,	how	could	I,	fool	that	I	am,	go	on	sitting
in	my	office,	or	here	at	home,	instead	of	leaping	onto	a	train	with	my
eyes	shut	and	opening	them	only	when	I	am	with	you?	Oh,	there	is	a
sad,	sad	reason	for	not	doing	so.	To	make	it	short:	My	health	is	only
just	good	enough	for	myself	alone,	not	good	enough	for	marriage,	let
alone	fatherhood.	Yet	when	I	read	your	letter,	I	feel	I	could	overlook
even	what	cannot	possibly	be	overlooked.
If	 only	 I	 had	 your	 answer	 now!	And	 how	horribly	 I	 torment	 you,

and	 how	 I	 compel	 you,	 in	 the	 stillness	 of	 your	 room,	 to	 read	 this
letter,	 as	 nasty	 a	 letter	 as	 has	 ever	 lain	 on	 your	 desk!	 Honestly,	 it
strikes	 me	 sometimes	 that	 I	 prey	 like	 a	 spectre	 on	 your	 felicitous
name!	If	only	I	had	mailed	Saturday’s	letter,	in	which	I	implored	you
never	to	write	to	me	again,	and	in	which	I	gave	a	similar	promise.	Oh
God,	 what	 prevented	 me	 from	 sending	 that	 letter?46	 All	 would	 be
well.	 But	 is	 a	 peaceful	 solution	 possible	 now?	Would	 it	 help	 if	 we
wrote	 to	each	other	only	once	a	week?	No,	 if	my	suffering	could	be
cured	by	 such	means	 it	would	not	be	 serious.	And	already	 I	 foresee
that	 I	 shan’t	 be	 able	 to	 endure	 even	 the	 Sunday	 letters.	 And	 so,	 to
compensate	 for	 Saturday’s	 lost	 opportunity,	 I	 ask	 you	 with	 what
energy	remains	to	me	at	the	end	of	this	letter:	If	we	value	our	lives,	let
us	abandon	it	all.47
Did	I	think	of	signing	myself	Dein?	No,	nothing	could	be	more	false.

No,	I	am	forever	fettered	to	myself,	that’s	what	I	am,	and	that’s	what	I
must	try	to	live	with.

Franz

The	following	lines	were	written	on	November	13,	1912,	but	not	delivered
until	Sunday,	November	17,	by	a	Berlin	florist’s	messenger,	together	with	a
bunch	of	roses.	The	following	day,	the	18th,	was	Felice’s	birthday

Miserable	 attempt	 to	 let	 innocent	 roses	 follow	 criminal	 words!	 But
that’s	how	 it	 is:	The	outside	world	 is	 too	 small,	 too	 straightforward,
too	truthful,	to	hold	all	that	is	contained	in	one	man.—Well	and	good,



but	in	that	case	a	man	should	keep	himself	under	control,	at	any	rate
with	 a	 person	 upon	 whom	 he	 feels	 himself	 dependent.—In	 other
words,	just	where	it	is	utterly	impossible?

November	14,	1912
Dearest,	dearest!	As	 long	as	there	 is	so	much	goodness	 in	the	world,
one	 need	 not	 fear,	 need	 not	 be	 anxious.	 Your	 letter	 arrived—I	 was
sitting	 with	 my	 chief	 discussing	 the	 feldspar	 mining	 insurance—I
clutched	 the	 letter,	my	 hands	 trembling	 as	 usual,	 and	 stared	 at	my
chief	as	though	he	were	a	ghost.	But	as	soon	as	I	had	read	it	two	or
three	times,	I	felt	as	calm	as	I	had	longed	to	be	for	ages,	and	prayed	to
be	 three	 nights	 ago.	 Your	 [Dein]	 envelope—(but	 that’s	 wrong,	 it
should	 be	 the	 envelope,	 but	 the	 Du	 and	 Dein	 insist	 on	 showing
themselves	all	the	time)—the	envelope	with	its	comforting	words	can’t
have	 been	 the	 cause,	 for	 I	 didn’t	 read	 them	 until	 later,	 and	 the
contents	 of	 the	 letter	 should	 have	 shaken	 me,	 for	 the	 more	 one	 is
given	the	more	frightened	one	must	be	on	this	spinning	globe—so	it
can	only	have	been	the	Du	that	gripped	me,	this	Du	for	which	I	thank
you	on	my	knees;	my	anxiety	about	you	forced	it	out	of	me,	and	now
you	calmly	give	it	back	to	me.	Dearest	one!	Can	I	really	be	sure	of	you
now?	The	Sie	glides	as	though	on	skates,	it	may	have	disappeared	in
the	 crack	 between	 two	 letters,	 one	 has	 to	 chase	 after	 it	with	 letters
and	 thoughts	 morning,	 noon,	 and	 night;	 but	 the	Du	 stands	 firm;	 it
stays	here	 like	your	 letter	 that	doesn’t	move	when	I	kiss	 it	over	and
over	 again.	 But	what	 a	word	 that	 is!	 Nothing	 unites	 two	 people	 so
completely,	especially	if,	like	you	and	me,	all	they	have	is	words.
Today	 I	was	 the	 calmest	person	 in	 the	office,	 as	 calm	as	only	 the
most	self-disciplined	could	expect	to	be,	after	a	week	such	as	this	last.
I	will	tell	you	more	about	it	later.	Just	think,	I	even	look	well;	there
are	always	a	few	people	at	the	office	who	make	it	their	daily	business
to	scrutinize	my	appearance.	It	was	they	who	said	so.	I	did	not	hurry
to	answer	your	letter	(which	in	any	case	was	quite	impossible	today),
but	every	breath	in	me	answered	you	and	thanked	you.
Dearest,	dearest!	I	would	repeat	this	word	over	and	over	again	for
pages	were	 I	 not	 afraid	 that,	 should	 someone	 come	 into	 your	 room
while	 you	were	 studying	 such	 uniformly	 covered	 sheets,	 you	might
not	be	able	to	hide	what	you	were	reading.	 I	wrote	only	a	 few	lines
yesterday;	you	won’t	get	them	till	Sunday.	It	would	be	difficult	to	call
them	back	now,	but	anyway	it	 is	not	necessary.	 I	 just	mention	 it,	 so
that	you	are	not	unnecessarily	startled—I	have	certainly	managed	to



startle	 you	 often	 enough	 so	 far!—it’s	 only	 a	 few	 lines,	 undated,
without	heading	or	signature,	a	pitiful,	uncertain	attempt	at	winning
you	back.	Treat	them	kindly!
But	tell	me,	how	do	you	know	that	what	I	have	been	writing	to	you
on	 and	 off	 just	 recently	 was	 anguish	 and	 not	madness?	 It	 certainly
seemed	more	 like	 the	 latter,	and	had	 I	been	you	I	 should	have	 tried
hard	to	withdraw.	The	last	letter,	for	example,	wasn’t	written,	it	was
(forgive	the	expression)	spewed	out:	I	was	lying	in	bed	and	it	occurred
to	 me	 not	 as	 a	 sequence	 of	 sentences,	 but	 as	 one	 single	 terrible
sentence	which	I	 felt	would	kill	me	if	 I	did	not	write	 it	down.	Then,
once	I	had	actually	started	writing,	it	was	no	longer	so	bad;	I	collected
my	thoughts,	pursued	my	memories,	and	here	and	there	a	few	small
consoling	untruths	crept	into	the	letter.	But	the	ease	with	which	I	took
it	 to	 the	 station,	 the	haste	 in	which	 I	mailed	 it,	 and	how	 I	 returned
home,	a	profoundly	unhappy	but	still	living	man—until	those	dreadful
two	hours	before	going	to	sleep	again	changed	my	frame	of	mind.
Enough	of	 that.	 I	 shall	get	your	 letters	again;	write	whenever	you
feel	like	it,	or	rather	whenever	you	can;	don’t	stay	late	at	the	office	on
my	account,	I	won’t	suffer	if	I	don’t	get	a	letter,	and	when	I	do	get	one
again	 it	will	 come	 to	 life	 in	my	hands	 as	 no	 letter	 (I	 feel)	 has	 ever
done	 before,	 and	 in	my	 eyes	 and	 to	my	 lips	 it	 will	 amply	 take	 the
place	of	all	 those	unwritten	letters.	You	on	the	other	hand	will	have
more	time	to	go	for	walks	on	these	lovely	evenings	(yesterday	I	went
for	a	walk	with	my	youngest	sister	from	10	to	11:30	at	night,	we	left
at	10	and	returned	at	11:30;	you	may	not	be	able	to	imagine	her,	she
is	20	years	old,	enormously	 tall	and	strong,	but	 still	 childish)	 if	you
are	 not	 rushing	 off	 to	 rehearsals.	 I	 hope	 your	 “Humor”48	 comes	 off
successfully!	 I	have	been	tormenting	Max	and	on	several	walks	have
almost	dislocated	his	 arm,	all	because	of	you,	but	 the	 silly	man	can
tell	 me	 next	 to	 nothing	 about	 the	 whole	 of	 that	 telephone
conversation,	 except	 for	 your	 laughter.	 If	 you	 can	 laugh	 into	 the
telephone,	 you	 must	 be	 a	 very	 accomplished	 telephonist.	 The	 very
thought	of	the	telephone	makes	me	forget	 laughter.	Otherwise,	what
would	prevent	me	from	dashing	to	the	post	office	to	say	good	evening
to	 you?	 But	 sitting	 there	 for	 an	 hour,	 waiting	 to	 be	 put	 through,
clutching	the	seat	in	anxiety,	eventually	being	summoned	and	rushing
all	of	a	tremble	to	the	telephone,	then	asking	for	you	in	a	feeble	voice,
finally	 hearing	 you	 and	 perhaps	 not	 being	 capable	 of	 answering,
thanking	God	that	the	three	minutes	are	over	and	feeling	by	now	an
intolerable	longing	to	get	home	and	really	talk	to	you	at	last—no,	I’d



rather	not.	Yet	the	possibility	remains	as	an	attractive	thought.	What
is	your	telephone	number?	I	am	afraid	Max	has	forgotten	it.
Well,	 that’s	 that:	 now	 my	 sleep	 will	 be	 exemplary.	 Dearest,	 my
dearest,	I	am	entirely	unmusical,	but	does	this	not	cry	out	for	music!

Yours,	Franz

November	14,	1912
Dearest,	don’t	 let	me	disturb	you,	 I’m	only	saying	goodnight,	and	 to
do	so	I	broke	off	in	the	middle	of	a	page	of	my	writing.	I’m	afraid	that
soon	I	shall	no	longer	be	able	to	write	to	you,	for	to	be	able	to	write
to	someone	(I	must	give	you	all	kinds	of	names,	so	for	once	you	must
be	 called	 “someone”)	 one	 has	 to	 have	 an	 idea	 of	 the	 face	 one	 is
addressing.	 I	do	have	a	clear	 idea	of	your	 face,	 that	wouldn’t	be	the
trouble.	But	 far	clearer	 than	that	 is	an	 image	that	now	comes	 to	me
more	 and	 more	 often:	 of	 my	 face	 resting	 on	 your	 shoulder,	 of	 my
talking,	 partly	 smothered	 and	 indistinctly,	 to	 your	 shoulder,	 your
dress,	to	myself,	while	you	can	have	no	notion	of	what	is	being	said.
Are	 you	 asleep?	 Or	 are	 you	 still	 reading—of	 which	 I	 would
disapprove?	Or	are	you	still	at	a	rehearsal?	I	most	sincerely	hope	not.
By	my	watch,	always	slow	but	never	out	of	order,	it	is	now	7	minutes
to	1.	Remember,	you	should	sleep	more	than	other	people,	for	I	sleep
less,	 though	not	much	 less,	 than	most.	And	 I	 can’t	 think	of	 a	 better
place	to	store	my	unused	share	of	universal	sleep	than	in	your	beloved
eyes.
And	no	wild	dreams,	please!	In	my	mind	I	am	making	a	tour	around
your	bed,	demanding	silence.	And	after	I	have	put	everything	in	order
there,	 and	 perhaps	 even	 shooed	 away	 a	 drunk	 from	 the
Immanuelkirchstrasse,	I	return,	more	orderly	within	myself	as	well,	to
my	writing,	or	perhaps	even	straight	to	sleep.
Never	fail,	dearest,	to	tell	me	roughly	what	you	were	doing	roughly
at	 the	 time	 I	 am	writing	 to	 you.	 I	will	 then	 check	my	 own	 guesses
against	 it,	 and	 if	 possible	 you	 will	 make	 the	 facts	 approach	 my
guesses;	 would	 it	 then	 be	 so	 incredible	 if	 eventually,	 after	 many
attempts,	they	were	to	coincide	and	become	one	great	reality	of	which
we	 could	 always	 be	 certain?—Just	 now	 the	 tower	 clock	 strikes	 1
o’clock,	Prague	time.
Adieu,	 Felice,	 adieu!	 How	 did	 you	 get	 that	 name?	 And	 don’t	 fly
away!	 This	 suddenly	 comes	 to	my	mind	 somehow,	 perhaps	 through



the	 word	 “adieu,”	 which	 has	 a	 certain	 soaring	 quality.	 I	 think	 one
could	derive	extraordinary	pleasure	 from	soaring	 to	great	heights,	 if
this	could	rid	one	of	a	heavy	burden	which	clings	to	one	as	I	cling	to
you.	Don’t	be	tempted	by	the	beckoning	of	such	relief.	Hold	on	to	the
delusion	that	you	need	me;	think	yourself	more	deeply	into	it.	It	won’t
do	you	any	harm,	you	know,	and	if	one	day	you	want	to	get	rid	of	me
you	will	always	have	the	strength	to	do	so;	but	meanwhile	you	have
given	me	 a	 gift	 such	 as	 I	 never	 even	 dreamt	 of	 finding	 in	 this	 life.
That’s	how	it	is,	even	if	in	your	sleep	you	shake	your	head.

Franz

[LETTERHEAD:	Workers’	Accident	Insurance	Institute]
November	15,	1912

Look,	 the	 “Du”	 is	 nothing	 like	 the	 help	 I	 thought	 it	 would	 be.	 And
today,	 only	 the	 second	 day,	 it	 isn’t	 proving	 of	 much	 use.	 Surely	 I
could	have	remained	calm,	and	nothing	 is	easier	 to	understand	 than
that	 no	 letter	 arrived	 today.	 But	what	 do	 I	 do?	 I	 hover	 around	 the
corridors,	stare	at	every	clerk’s	hands,	issue	unnecessary	orders	simply
to	 send	 someone	 down	 especially	 for	 the	mail	 (for	 I	 am	 on	 the	 4th
floor,	 the	 incoming	 mail	 is	 sorted	 downstairs,	 our	 mailmen	 are
unpunctual,	in	addition	we	are	in	the	midst	of	our	board	elections,	the
incoming	mail	 is	 immense,	 and	 before	 your	 letter	 is	 extracted	 from
the	 silly	 pile	 I	 might	 have	 died	 of	 impatience	 upstairs);	 finally,
prompted	by	my	distrust	of	all	and	sundry,	 I	myself	 rush	down	and,
needless	to	say,	find	nothing;	had	something	arrived	I	should	have	got
it	in	no	time,	for	I	have	enlisted	3	people	to	bring	your	letter	up	to	me
before	any	other	mail.	For	this	assignment,	these	three	deserve	to	be
named:	 the	 first	 is	 the	 clerk	Mergl,	 humble	 and	 obliging;	 but	 I	 feel
uncontrollable	 antipathy	 toward	 him	 because	 I	 have	 observed	 that
once	my	hopes	are	centered	mainly	on	him,	your	letter	arrives	only	on
the	rarest	of	occasions.	And	when	it	does,	 this	man’s	unintentionally
cruel	face	sets	my	teeth	on	edge.	That	in	fact	is	what	happened	today,
I	could	willingly	have	thrashed	the	empty	hand.	And	yet	he	seems	to
take	a	 sympathetic	 interest.	 I	 am	not	 ashamed	 to	admit	 that	 several
times	on	these	blank	days	I	have	asked	his	opinion	as	to	whether	the
letter	might	 perhaps	 arrive	 the	 next	 day,	 and	 each	 time,	with	 deep
obeisances,	 he	 has	 been	 convinced	 it	 would.	 Once—I	 suddenly
remember—I	 was	 expecting	 a	 letter	 from	 you	 with	 unreasonable



certainty,	I	think	it	must	have	been	during	that	bad	first	month,	when
this	clerk	announced	to	me	 in	 the	corridor	 that	 the	mail	had	 indeed
turned	up	and	was	lying	on	my	desk.	But	when	I	hurried	to	my	desk,
all	that	lay	there	was	a	postcard	from	Max	from	Venice	with	Bellini’s
picture	representing	The	Goddess	of	Love,	Ruler	of	the	Terrestrial	Globe.
But	 what	 good	 are	 generalizations	 in	 one’s	 own	 painful	 case!—The
second	messenger	is	the	head	of	the	mailing	department,	Wottawa,	a
little	old	bachelor	with	a	wrinkled	face	covered	in	a	variety	of	colored
blotches	and	bristling	with	stubble,	his	wet	lips	constantly	munching	a
cigar;	 but	 he	 is	 divinely	 handsome	when	 he	 stands	 in	 the	 doorway,
pulls	your	letter	out	of	his	 inside	pocket,	and	hands	it	 to	me—a	job,
needless	to	say,	not	actually	his.	He	has	an	inkling	of	what	it’s	about,
for	whenever	he	has	time	he	invariably	tries	to	forestall	the	other	two
and	doesn’t	grumble	at	having	to	climb	the	4	flights	of	stairs.	On	the
other	hand,	 I	am	distressed	at	 the	 thought	 that	 in	order	 to	hand	the
letter	over	to	me	personally	he	sometimes	withholds	 it	 from	another
clerk	who	 now	 and	 then	would	 deliver	 it	 sooner.	 So	 there’s	 always
some	 cause	 for	 anxiety.—My	 third	 hope	 is	 Fräulein	 Böhm.	 Indeed,
handing	 me	 the	 letter	 makes	 her	 positively	 happy.	 She	 comes	 in
beaming	and	hands	me	the	letter	as	though	it	were	from	a	third	party,
but	actually	concerns	only	the	two	of	us,	her	and	me.	When	one	of	the
other	 two	succeeds	 in	bringing	 the	 letter	and	 I	 tell	her	about	 it,	 she
looks	as	 if	she	were	about	to	cry,	and	promises	to	be	more	watchful
the	next	day.	However,	 the	building	 is	very	big,	we	have	more	 than
250	employees,	and	someone	else	can	easily	get	the	letter	first.
Today	all	three	were	out	of	work.	I	wonder	how	often	I	shall	repeat
it,	since	it	was	impossible	for	a	letter	to	arrive	today.	Besides,	it	was
only	today,	on	this	day	of	 transition,	 that	 I	 felt	anxious;	 if	you	don’t
write	after	tomorrow’s	letter	I	shan’t	worry	about	it	any	more.	I	used
to	 say	 to	myself:	 “She	 doesn’t	 write,”	 and	 that	 was	 bad,	 but	 now	 I
shall	say:	“Dearest,	so	you	have	gone	for	a	walk,”	and	that	can	only
give	 me	 pleasure.	 By	 the	 way,	 at	 what	 time	 did	 you	 get	 my	 night
letter?

Yours,	Franz

November	15,	1912,	11:30	in	the	evening
Dearest,	 today	 I	 am	 writing	 to	 you	 before	 embarking	 on	 my	 own
writing,	 to	 avoid	 the	 sensation	of	 keeping	 you	waiting,	 to	have	 you



not	opposite	me	but	by	my	side,	and	to	be	calmer	for	my	own	writing,
for	 I	 must	 tell	 you	 in	 confidence	 that	 these	 past	 few	 days	 I	 have
written	terribly	little,	indeed	practically	nothing;	I	am	too	preoccupied
with	you,	think	too	much	about	you.
Of	 the	 two	 books,	which	may	 not	 arrive	 in	 time,	 one	 is	 for	 your

eyes,	 the	 other	 for	 your	 heart.	 The	 first	 is	 rather	 arbitrarily	 chosen,
good	as	 it	 is;	 there	are	many	other	books	I	ought	to	give	you	before
this	one;	but	it	is	meant	to	show	that	between	us	even	the	arbitrary	is
permissible,	 because	 it	 turns	 into	 a	 necessity.	 But	 Education
sentimentale	 is	a	book	that	for	many	years	has	been	as	dear	to	me	as
are	only	two	or	three	people;	whenever	and	wherever	I	open	it,	I	am
startled	and	succumb	to	 it	completely,	and	 I	always	 feel	as	 though	I
were	the	author’s	spiritual	son,	albeit	a	weak	and	awkward	one.	Tell
me	 at	 once	 whether	 you	 read	 French.	 You	 will	 then	 get	 the	 new
French	edition	 too.	Tell	me	 that	you	do	 read	French,	 even	 if	 it	 isn’t
true,	for	this	French	edition	is	magnificent.
For	 your	birthday	 (so	 it	 coincides	with	your	mother’s,	 is	 your	 life

such	 a	 direct	 extension	 of	 hers?)	 I	 of	 all	 people	must	 not	wish	 you
anything,	 for	 although	 there	probably	 are	 things	 one	 could	urgently
wish	for	you,	they	would	at	 the	same	time	be	directed	against	me—
and	so	 I	cannot	express	 them;	what	 I	could	say	would	be	sheer	self-
interest.	 To	make	 sure	 that,	 as	 needs	 be,	 I	 do	 not	 say	 anything	 and
express	no	wish,	allow	me	this	once,	and	only	in	my	imagination,	to
kiss	your	beloved	lips.

Franz

Max	Brod	to	Felice	Bauer
November	15,	1912

Dear	Fräulein	Bauer,
Many	 thanks	 for	 your	 letter.	 I	 shall	 have	 a	 word	with	 Franz	 this

afternoon—needless	to	say,	without	mentioning	your	letter.	I	will	then
write	 to	 you	 at	 once	 unless,	 as	 I	 hope,	 the	 situation	has	meanwhile
been	cleared	up,	 in	which	case	 it	would	be	 superfluous.—All	 I	 ask	 is
that	you	should	make	allowances	for	Franz	and	his	often	pathological
sensitivity.	 He	 responds	 entirely	 to	 the	 mood	 of	 the	 moment.
Altogether	 he	 is	 a	 man	 who	 wants	 nothing	 but	 the	 absolute,	 the
ultimate	 in	 all	 things.	 He	 is	 never	 prepared	 to	 compromise.	 For
example,	when	he	does	not	feel	fully	in	possession	of	all	his	faculties



for	work,	he	is	capable	of	not	writing	a	single	line	for	months	on	end
rather	than	content	himself	with	work	he	considers	second	best.	And
as	 with	 his	 writing,	 so	 with	 everything	 else.	 That	 is	 why	 he	 often
appears	moody,	 eccentric,	 etc.	 But	 from	my	 profound	 knowledge	 of
his	 character	 I	know	 that	 this	 is	not	 the	case.	When	 it	 comes	 to	 the
point	 he	 is	 even	 very	 clever	 and	 sensible	 in	 practical	 matters.	 But
when	it	comes	to	ideals	he	cannot	take	things	lightly;	in	such	matters
he	is	terribly	severe,	above	all	with	himself;	and	since	he	is	physically
not	 very	 strong	 and	 the	 circumstances	 of	 his	 daily	 life	 (the	 office!!)
are	not	favorable,	conflicts	arise	which	one	must	try	and	help	him	to
overcome	with	understanding	and	kindness,	aware	that	such	a	unique
and	wonderful	human	being	deserves	to	be	treated	in	a	different	way
from	the	millions	of	banal	and	commonplace	people.—I	am	convinced
that	you	will	not	misunderstand	what	I	say.	Please	turn	to	me	in	any
situation	of	this	kind.—Franz	suffers	greatly	from	having	to	be	at	his
office	every	day	until	2	o’clock.	 In	 the	afternoon	he	 is	exhausted,	so
all	that	is	left	for	the	“profusion	of	his	visions”49	is	the	night.	This	is
tragic.	And	there	he	is,	writing	a	novel	that	puts	everything	I	know	in
the	way	of	 literature	 in	 the	 shade.	What	might	he	not	 achieve	 if	he
were	free	and	in	good	hands!
I	ask	you	earnestly	not	 to	 tell	anyone	 that	 I	have	been	 to	Berlin.	 I
have	seen	no	one,	spoken	only	to	you.—I	hope	you	are	well	and	that
everything	will	turn	out	all	right.

Sincerely	yours,	Max	Brod

November	15	[16],	1912
Dearest,	 please	 don’t	 torment	 me!	 Please!	 No	 letter	 even	 today,
Saturday—today,	 when	 I	 felt	 sure	 it	 would	 come,	 as	 sure	 as	 day
follows	 night.	 But	who	 insisted	 on	 a	whole	 letter?	 Just	 two	 lines,	 a
greeting,	 an	 envelope,	 a	 card!	 After	 four	 letters	 (this	 is	 the	 fifth)	 I
haven’t	had	a	single	word	from	you.	Shame,	this	isn’t	right.	How	am	I
to	get	through	these	endless	days—work,	talk,	and	do	whatever	else	is
expected	of	me?	Perhaps	nothing	has	happened,	you	just	haven’t	had
the	 time,	 rehearsals	 or	 conferences	 about	 the	 play	 may	 have
prevented	you,	but	please	tell	me,	who	in	the	world	could	prevent	you
from	going	over	to	a	small	table,	picking	up	a	pencil,	writing	“Felice”
on	a	scrap	of	paper,	and	sending	it	to	me?	It	would	mean	so	much	to
me.	A	sign	of	you	being	alive,	a	reassurance	for	me	in	my	attempt	at



clinging	to	a	living	being.	A	letter	will	and	must	come	tomorrow,	or	I
won’t	know	what	to	do;	then	all	will	be	well	and	I’ll	stop	plaguing	you
with	 endless	 requests	 for	 more	 letters;	 but	 if	 there	 is	 a	 letter
tomorrow,	 then	 it	 will	 have	 been	 superfluous	 to	 greet	 you	 in	 your
office	on	Monday	morning	with	these	complaints;	I	must	express	them
however	 because,	 if	 you	 don’t	 write,	 no	 reasoning	 can	 dispel	 the
feeling	I	have	that	you	are	 turning	away	from	me,	 talking	to	others,
and	have	forgotten	me.	Am	I	to	suffer	this	in	silence?	Nor	is	this	the
first	 time	 I	 have	 had	 to	 wait	 for	 a	 letter	 from	 you	 (though	 I’m
convinced	 as	 always	 that	 it	 isn’t	 your	 fault),	 which	 this	 old	 letter,
enclosed,	will	prove.

Yours

Enclosure:
[LETTERHEAD:	Workers’	Accident	Insurance	Institute]

Dear	Fräulein	Bauer,
I	 have	 just	 returned	 from	 the	 regional	 government	 office;	 walked
slowly	there	and	back,	it	is	quite	a	distance,	across	the	river	on	to	the
far	bank	of	 the	Moldau.	 I	had	 resigned	myself	 to	 the	 fact	 that	 there
would	be	no	 letter	 from	you50	 today,	 for	up	 to	now	 I	have	believed
that	if	it	doesn’t	come	in	the	morning	it	won’t	come	at	all.	For	various
reasons	I	have	been	a	little	sad	and	preoccupied	these	past	two	days,
and	 on	 the	way	 back	 stopped	 on	Belvederegasse—apartment	 houses
on	one	side	of	the	street,	on	the	other	the	exceptionally	high	wall	of
Count	Waldstein’s	 garden51—and	without	 thinking	 took	 your	 letters
out	 of	 my	 pocket,	 put	 the	 letter	 to	 Max	 (which	 lay	 on	 top	 and	 in
which	 I	 wasn’t	 particularly	 interested)	 underneath,	 and	 read	 a	 few
lines	of	your	first	letter.	No	doubt	these	movements	were	partly	those
of	 one	 asleep,	 for	 I	 sleep	 very	 little	 and	 am	 aware	 of	 it	 without
actually	being	tired.	And	then	I	arrive	at	the	office,	and	there	is	your
unexpected	 letter,	written	 on	 sheets	 of	 the	magnificent	 size	 of	 your
writing	paper,	and	it	is	of	most	gratifying	weight.
Once	more	what	 I	 am	writing	 is	not	 an	answer;	 let	 questions	 and
answers	entangle	themselves	to	their	hearts’	content;	over	and	above
all	 that	 is	 good	 in	your	 letter,	 the	best	 is	 your	permission	 to	 let	me
write	to	you	whenever	I	like;	for	I	had	at	last	come	to	the	conclusion
that	it	may	perhaps	be	time	to	cease	the	daily	repetition	of	writing;	I



don’t	 know	 you	 in	 this	 respect,	 perhaps	 the	 daily	 arrival	 of	 a	 letter
embarrasses	 you;	 but	 I,	 unpunctual	 as	 I	 am	 throughout	 my	 entire
being,	 am	 bent	 on	 writing	 to	 you,	 to	 you	 in	 particular,	 without
opposition.	But	now	I	have	your	permission,	I	can	do	as	I	like;	and	just
as	I	may	write	again	even	without	an	answer,	I	am	left	with	the	hope
that,	should	I	be	incapable	of	writing,	I	might	yet	receive	a	letter	out
of	kindness,	since	I	shall	then	need	it	all	the	more.
Only	 one	 answer	 today.	 Away	 with	 the	 Pyramidons	 and	 all	 that
kind	of	thing!	Go	straight	to	the	cause	of	the	headaches	rather	than	to
the	druggist!	It’s	a	pity	I	cannot	examine	a	longer	period	of	your	life
so	as	to	understand	where	the	origins	of	your	headaches	are	hidden.
Isn’t	 the	 sense	 of	 artificiality	 these	medicines	 produce,	 even	 at	 their
best,	more	unbearable	to	you	than	the	headaches,	which	are	at	least	a
natural	affliction?	On	the	whole,	healing	is	only	possible	from	person
to	person,	just	as	pain	can	be	transmitted	only	from	person	to	person,
as	is	happening	in	this	case	with	your	headaches	and	me.
Farewell,	and	continue	to	feel	well	disposed	toward	me.

Yours,	Kafka

The	first	letter	from	Franz	Kafka’s	mother	to	Felice	Bauer
Prague,	November	16,	1912

My	dear	Fräulein	Bauer,
By	chance	I	caught	sight	of	a	letter	dated	Nov.	12,	addressed	to	my
son	and	signed	by	you.	I	liked	your	manner	of	writing	so	much	that	I
read	the	letter	to	the	end	before	realizing	that	I	was	not	entitled	to	do
so.
But	 when	 I	 assure	 you	 that	 it	 was	 only	my	 son’s	 well-being	 that
impelled	me,	I	feel	certain	you	will	forgive	me.
Although	I	have	not	had	the	pleasure	of	meeting	you	personally,	 I
have	enough	confidence	in	you,	dear	Fräulein	Bauer,	to	confide	in	you
a	mother’s	worries.
What	contributes	 considerably	 to	 this	 confidence	 is	 the	 suggestion
in	your	letter	that	he	should	talk	to	his	mother,	who	surely	loves	him.
Your	 opinion	 of	 me	 is	 correct,	 dear	 Fräulein	 Bauer,	 which	 is	 only
natural,	since	any	normal	mother	must	 love	her	children,	but	 I	have
no	words	 to	describe	 the	 love	 I	 feel	 for	my	 son,	 and	 I	would	gladly
give	several	years	of	my	life	if	this	could	ensure	his	happiness.
Anyone	else	 in	his	place	would	be	 the	happiest	of	mortals,	 for	his



parents	have	never	denied	him	any	wish.	He	studied	whatever	he	felt
like,	and	since	he	did	not	want	to	be	a	lawyer	he	chose	the	career	of
an	official,	which	seemed	to	suit	him	quite	well,	as	the	working	hours
are	short	and	he	has	the	afternoons	to	himself.52
I	 have	 known	 for	 many	 years	 that	 he	 spends	 his	 leisure	 hours
writing.	 But	 I	 assumed	 this	 to	 be	 a	 mere	 pastime.	 Actually,	 this
occupation	would	not	harm	his	health	if	only	he	would	sleep	and	eat
like	other	young	people	of	his	age.	But	he	sleeps	and	eats	so	little	that
he	 is	 undermining	 his	 health,	 and	 I	 am	 afraid	 he	may	 not	 listen	 to
reason	until,	God	 forbid,	 it	 is	 too	 late.	 I	would	 therefore	very	much
like	to	ask	you	if	you	could	somehow	draw	his	attention	to	this	fact,
question	him	about	the	way	he	lives,	what	he	eats,	how	many	meals
he	has,	and	about	his	daily	routine	in	general.	On	the	other	hand,	he
must	not	suspect	that	I	have	written	to	you,	nor	must	he	learn	that	I
am	aware	of	his	 correspondence	with	you.	Should	 it	be	within	your
power	to	change	his	mode	of	life,	I	would	be	greatly	in	your	debt	and
you	would	be	making	me	very	happy.

With	the	expression	of	my	great	esteem,	Julie	Kafka

If	you	wish	to	write	to	me,	please	address	the	letter	to:	Altstädter
Ring,	Kinsky	Palais	16,	Prague.—Personal.

November	17,	1912
Dearest,	 very	 dearest!	 Utterly	 damnable	 creature	 that	 I	 am,	 I	 now
must	take	the	credit	for	having	made	you,	a	healthy	person,	ill!	Take
care	 of	 yourself,	 do	 you	 hear	me,	 take	 care	 of	 yourself,	 and	 for	my
sake	please	cure	what	I	have	caused!	And	I	have	the	nerve	to	reproach
you	for	not	writing,	and	am	so	wrapped	up	in	my	own	anxieties	and
longings	 that	 I	 don’t	 even	 sense	 that	 you	 are	 ill,	 and	 instead	 nurse
ridiculous	suspicions	that	you	are	at	rehearsals	or	parties.	Honestly,	if
we	 were	 separated	 by	 whole	 continents	 and	 you	 were	 living
somewhere	in	Asia,	we	could	not	be	further	apart.	Every	one	of	your
letters,	 no	 matter	 how	 short,	 is	 for	 me	 endless	 (God,	 everything
seemingly	turns	into	a	reproach,	today’s	letter	is	not	short,	it	is	exactly
10,000	times	longer	than	I	deserve);	I	read	it	down	to	the	signature,
then	 start	 again,	 and	 so	 it	 goes	 around	 and	 around	 in	 circles.	 But
finally	 I	have	to	admit	 that	 it	does	have	a	 full	 stop,	 that	you	got	up
and	disappeared,	as	far	as	I	am	concerned,	into	the	dark.	It’s	enough



to	make	one	despair	of	oneself!
But	it	was	high	time	your	letter	arrived	today.	I	am	not	as	resolute
as	you,	I	wasn’t	thinking	of	going	to	Berlin,	I	had	simply	resolved	not
to	get	out	of	bed	until	your	letter	arrived,	and	this	resolution	needed
no	particular	determination,	I	was	just	too	unhappy	to	get	up.	It	also
struck	me	that	during	last	night	my	novel	had	definitely	deteriorated,
and	I	was	at	my	lowest	ebb,	yet	I	still	had	a	most	vivid	memory	of	my
joy	on	receiving	that	registered	letter,	and	whenever	I	looked	up	I	saw
myself—I,	who	was	so	wretched—walking	on	high	in	utter	bliss.	The
night	before	last	I	dreamt	about	you	for	the	second	time.	A	mailman
brought	two	registered	letters	from	you,	that	is,	he	delivered	them	to
me,	one	in	each	hand,	his	arms	moving	in	perfect	precision,	 like	the
jerking	of	piston	rods	in	a	steam	engine.	God,	they	were	magic	letters!
I	kept	pulling	out	page	after	page,	but	the	envelopes	never	emptied.	I
was	 standing	halfway	up	a	 flight	of	 stairs	 and	 (don’t	hold	 it	 against
me)	had	to	throw	the	pages	I	had	read	all	over	the	stairs,	in	order	to
take	 more	 letters	 out	 of	 the	 envelopes.	 The	 whole	 staircase	 was
littered	from	top	to	bottom	with	the	loosely	heaped	pages	I	had	read,
the	 resilient	 paper	 creating	 a	 great	 rustling	 sound.	 That	 was	 a	 real
wish-dream!
But	 this	morning	 I	 had	 to	 use	 very	 different	means	 to	 attract	 the
mailman.	 Our	 mailmen	 are	 so	 unpunctual.	 Your	 letter	 didn’t	 arrive
until	11:15;	ten	times	I	sent	various	people	from	my	bed	out	onto	the
landing,	as	 though	this	could	entice	him	to	appear;	 I	didn’t	dare	get
up,	but	finally	at	11:15	your	letter	really	was	here,	ripped	open,	and
read	 in	 one	 breath.	 I	 was	 unhappy	 about	 your	 illness,	 but	 now	my
true	 nature	 is	 revealed:	 I	 would	 have	 been	 unhappier	 still	 had	 you
been	well,	 and	had	not	written	 to	me.	But	now	we	have	each	other
again,	 and	 after	 a	 firm	 handshake	we	must	 try	 to	make	 each	 other
healthier,	 and	 then	 continue	 to	 live	 together	 in	 good	 health.—Once
again	 I	 haven’t	 answered	 anything,	 but	 answers	 have	 to	 be	 given
orally;	 in	 writing	 one	 doesn’t	 achieve	 much,	 at	 most	 a	 foretaste	 of
happiness.	 Anyway,	 I	 shall	 be	writing	 to	 you	 again	 today,	 though	 I
still	have	to	do	a	lot	of	running	around,	not	to	mention	a	short	story
that	occurred	 to	me	 in	bed	 in	my	misery,	and	now	 troubles	me	and
demands	to	be	written.53

Yours,	Franz

[IN	 THE	 MARGIN]	 (Don’t	 worry,	 I	 definitely	 won’t	 telephone.	 Don’t	 you



either;	I	couldn’t	bear	it.)

November	[17	to]	18,	1912
My	dearest,	 it’s	1:30	at	night,	 the	 story	 I	mentioned	 is	by	no	means
finished,	not	a	 line	of	 the	novel	has	been	written	 today,	and	 I	go	 to
bed	with	little	enthusiasm.	If	only	the	night	were	free	to	keep	pen	to
paper	and	I	could	write	straight	through	to	the	morning!	That	would
be	 a	 good	 night.	 But	 I	must	 go	 to	 bed,	 for	 I	 slept	 badly	 last	 night,
hardly	 at	 all	 during	 the	 day,	 and	 I	 daren’t	 go	 to	 the	 office	 in	 too
wretched	a	state.	Tomorrow	your	letters,	dearest,	dearest!	When	I	am
more	or	 less	awake,	 they	undoubtedly	give	me	 strength,	but	when	 I
am	half-asleep	my	 one	 desire	 is	 to	 sink	 into	 a	 chair	with	 them	 and
bare	my	 teeth	 at	 anyone	 who	 dares	 to	 intrude.	 No,	 I	 don’t	 get	 too
worked	up	about	the	office;	the	obvious	justification	for	my	irritation
is	that	 it	has	survived	five	years	of	office	 life,	of	which	the	first	 in	a
private	insurance	company54	from	8	A.M.	to	7,	to	8,	and	8:30	P.M.	was
particularly	 awful.	 There	 was	 a	 certain	 place	 in	 a	 narrow	 passage
leading	 to	 my	 office	 where	 almost	 every	 morning	 I	 used	 to	 be
overcome	with	such	despair	that	a	stronger,	more	consistent	character
than	mine	might	have	committed	suicide	quite	cheerfully.	Needless	to
say,	things	are	much	better	now;	I	am	even	treated	with	undeserved
kindness.	Especially	by	my	top	director.55	The	other	day	in	his	office
we	 read	 together	 from	 a	 book	 of	 poems	 by	 Heine,	 while	 in	 the
anteroom	messengers,	 department	 heads,	 and	 clients—possibly	 with
urgent	 business—waited	 impatiently	 to	 see	 him.	 However,	 it	 is	 bad
enough,	 and	 considering	 the	 energy	 required,	 hardly	 worth	 the
candle.
It	has	just	occurred	to	me	that	you	might	be	irritated	by	this	kind	of
writing	paper.	I	used	up	all	my	sister’s	writing	paper	a	few	days	ago,
and	 I’ve	 hardly	 ever	 had	 any	 of	my	 own.	 So	 I	 tear	 page	 after	 page
from	this	year’s	travel	diary,	and	have	the	nerve	to	send	it	to	you.	But
I	am	trying	to	make	up	for	 it	by	enclosing	a	sheet	 that	 just	dropped
out	of	the	diary,	containing	a	song	sung	in	chorus	on	many	a	morning
in	 this	 year’s	 sanatorium,	 and	 I	 fell	 in	 love	with	 it	 and	 copied	 it.56
Actually,	it	is	very	well	known,	and	you	probably	know	it	too;	but	do
read	 the	words	again.	And	whatever	you	do,	 send	 the	 sheet	back	 to
me,	I	can’t	do	without	it.	Despite	the	emotion,	the	construction	of	the
poem	 is	 so	 neat,	 each	 stanza	 an	 exclamation,	 followed	 by	 an
inclination	of	the	head.	And	I	swear	the	poem’s	sadness	is	genuine.	If



only	 I	 could	 keep	 the	 tune	 in	my	 head,	 but	 I	 have	 no	memory	 for
music;	at	my	music	lessons	my	violin	teacher,	in	his	despair,	used	to
hold	out	 a	 stick	 for	me	 to	 jump	over,	 and	 from	 lesson	 to	 lesson	my
musical	progress	consisted	 in	his	raising	the	stick	higher	and	higher.
That’s	why	the	tune	I	put	to	this	song	is	very	monotonous,	really	only
a	sigh.	Dearest!

Franz

[A	TELEGRAM	POSTED	IN	PRAGUE	ON	NOVEMBER	18,	1912,	2:30	P.M.]

urgent	=	rp	10	urgent
felice	bauer	berlin	immanuel	kirchstrasse	29
are	you	ill	=	kafka	+	+

November	18,	1912
Dearest,	I	did	deserve	that	telegram!	I	am	sure	you	were	unavoidably
prevented	 from	 writing	 on	 Saturday,	 and	 I	 had	 no	 sort	 of	 right	 to
expect	a	letter	today;	these	unfortunate	Sundays	are	beginning	to	be	a
regular	misfortune	 in	 our	 relationship—but	 I	was	 rather	 put	 out	 by
the	previous	long	wait,	yesterday’s	letter	didn’t	quite	still	my	hunger,
especially	 because	 it	 dealt	 with	 your	 ill	 health,	 and	 then	 you	 had
given	a	definite	promise,	almost	more	definite	than	at	any	time,	that	I
could	 expect	 one	 or	 two	 letters	 on	 Monday,	 and	 none	 came;	 I	 felt
quite	muddle-headed	at	 the	office;	a	hundred	times	I	pushed	aside	a
book	 in	 which	 I	 was	 supposed	 to	 read	 something	 (decisions	 of	 the
Administrative	Court,	of	all	things),	a	hundred	times	I	pulled	it	back
again	 in	 vain.	 An	 engineer	 who	 had	 come	 to	 see	 me	 about	 an
exhibition	no	doubt	thought	I	was	mad,	for	I	just	stood	there,	with	no
thought	 in	my	head	but	that	 it	must	be	time	for	the	second	mail,	or
rather	 that	 the	 time	 for	 it	 had	 already	 passed,	 and	 in	 my
absentmindedness	I	kept	staring	intently	at	the	engineer’s	little	finger,
which	 was	 slightly	 crooked—the	 one	 thing	 I	 shouldn’t	 have	 been
staring	at!—Dearest!	I	won’t	go	on,	it	would	get	worse	and	worse,	and
finally	become	unbearable,	even	to	read.	And	even	telegrams	have	not
proved	as	successful	as	I	thought.	I	sent	the	telegram	“urgent”	at	2:30
and	did	not	get	the	reply	until	11:15	at	night—9	hours	later;	a	trip	to
Berlin	doesn’t	take	that	long,	and	at	least	there	is	no	doubt	that	one	is



getting	 nearer	 to	 Berlin,	 while	 for	 me	 the	 hope	 of	 a	 reply	 kept
receding.	Then	 at	 last	 the	bell!	 The	mailman!	Heavens!	And	what	 a
friendly,	happy	face	he	had!	That	telegram	couldn’t	contain	anything
unpleasant.	Of	 course	not,	 it	was	 full	 of	 kindness	 and	affection,	 and
that’s	 how	 it	 looks	 at	 me	 still,	 lying	 unfolded	 before	 me.	 Dearest,
where	does	one	find	the	strength	and	how	does	one	keep	one’s	head
when	one	soars	from	the	depth	of	misery	to	the	heights	of	bliss?
I	 am	 just	 sitting	 down	 to	 yesterday’s	 story	with	 an	 overwhelming
desire	 to	 pour	myself	 into	 it,	which	 obviously	 springs	 from	despair.
Beset	by	many	problems,	uncertain	of	you,	quite	incapable	of	coping
at	the	office,	my	novel	at	a	standstill	for	a	day,	with	a	fierce	longing
to	continue	the	new,	equally	demanding	story,	all	but	total	insomnia
for	 the	 last	 few	 days	 and	 nights,	 as	 well	 as	 some	 minor	 but
nevertheless	worrying	and	irritating	things	going	around	in	my	head
—in	short,	when	I	went	for	my	evening	walk	today,	reduced	by	now
to	half	an	hour	(always	of	course	on	the	 lookout	 for	 telegraph	boys,
actually	meeting	one,	but	a	long	way	from	our	house),	I	decided	quite
definitely	that	my	only	salvation	was	to	write	to	a	man	in	Silesia,	with
whom	 I	 had	 made	 friends	 this	 summer	 and	 who	 for	 whole	 long
afternoons	 had	 tried	 to	 convert	 me	 to	 Christ.57—But	 now	 your
telegram	is	here	and	we	can	 leave	 that	 letter	 for	a	while,	you	sweet
temptation!	Now	I	am	of	two	minds,	whether	in	honor	of	the	telegram
I	should	write	my	story,	or	go	to	bed.—And	not	one	word	of	apology
for	all	the	worries	and	troubles	I	caused	you	with	that	telegram.

Franz

November	19,	1912
Dearest,	this	is	not	a	reproach,	simply	a	request	for	an	explanation;	I
am	getting	very	depressed	because	I	am	completely	at	sea.	It	is	quite
right	that	we	should	stop	this	madness	of	so	many	letters;	yesterday	I
even	started	a	letter	on	this	subject	which	I	will	send	tomorrow;	but
surely	 we	must	 be	 in	 complete	 agreement	 about	 the	 change	 in	 our
writing	 habits;	 it	 must	 be	 discussed,	 and	 announced	 in	 advance;
otherwise	one	would	go	crazy.	Well	then,	how	can	I	explain	the	fact
that,	according	to	your	own	information,	you	received	or	at	any	rate
knew	 about	 my	 last	 registered	 letter	 on	 Friday	morning,	 but	 didn’t
answer	 it	 till	 Saturday;	 that	 in	 Saturday’s	 letter	 you	 said	you	would
write	 again	 that	 day,	 but	 didn’t;	 that	 on	Monday,	 instead	of	 getting



the	two	promised	letters,	I	get	none;	that	during	the	whole	of	Sunday
you	wrote	not	a	single	word,	not	until	late	that	night,	when	you	wrote
the	 letter	 which	 of	 course	 made	 me	 happy,	 insofar	 as	 I	 am	 still
capable	 of	 being	 happy,	 and	 you	 didn’t	 write	 even	 on	 Monday,
wouldn’t	have	written	at	 all	 if	 I	hadn’t	 sent	 that	 telegram,	 since	 the
only	 letter	 I	 received,	 dated	 Monday,	 is	 the	 express	 letter.	 But	 the
strangest	and	most	frightening	thing	is	this:	You	are	ill	for	a	day	and	a
half,	yet	attend	rehearsals	every	day	of	the	week;	despite	your	illness,
you	go	dancing	on	Saturday	night,	 come	home	at	7	 in	 the	morning,
stay	 up	 till	 1	 the	 next	 night,	 and	 on	 Monday	 you	 go	 to	 a	 private
dance.	 For	 heaven’s	 sake,	 what	 sort	 of	 life	 is	 that!	 Dearest,
explanations	 please!	 Forget	 about	 the	 flowers	 and	 books.	 They	 are
simply	a	sign	of	my	helplessness.

Franz

On	a	separate	page,	enclosed:
I	now	see	that	in	your	Sunday	letter	you	again	promised	definitely	to
write	on	Monday.

November	20,	1912
Dearest,	what	have	 I	done	 that	makes	you	torment	me	so?	No	 letter
again	today,	neither	by	the	first	mail	nor	the	second.	You	do	make	me
suffer!	 While	 one	 written	 word	 from	 you	 could	 make	 me	 happy!
You’ve	 had	 enough	 of	 me;	 there	 is	 no	 other	 explanation,	 it’s	 not
surprising	 after	 all;	 what	 is	 incomprehensible,	 though,	 is	 that	 you
don’t	write	and	tell	me	so.	If	I	am	to	go	on	living	at	all,	I	cannot	go	on
vainly	 waiting	 for	 news	 of	 you,	 as	 I	 have	 done	 these	 last	 few
interminable	days.	But	I	no	longer	have	any	hope	of	hearing	from	you.
I	shall	have	to	repeat	specifically	the	farewell	you	bid	me	in	silence.	I
should	like	to	throw	myself	bodily	on	this	letter,	so	that	it	cannot	be
mailed,	but	it	must	be	mailed.	I	shall	expect	no	further	letters.

Franz

[Probably	night	of	November	20	to	21,	1912]
Dearest,	my	dearest,	it	is	1:30	at	night.	Have	I	offended	you	with	this
morning’s	 letter?	 How	 am	 I	 to	 know	 about	 the	 responsibilities	 you
have	toward	your	relatives	and	friends!	You	take	all	that	trouble	and	I



trouble	you	with	my	reproaches	about	your	troubles.	Please,	dearest,
forgive	me!	Send	me	a	rose	to	show	that	you	have	forgiven.	I	am	not
actually	tired,	but	numb	and	heavy,	and	can’t	find	the	right	words.	All
I	 can	 say	 is:	 Stay	 with	 me,	 don’t	 leave	 me.	 And	 should	 one	 of	 my
enemies	 from	 within	 write	 to	 you	 as	 he	 did	 this	 morning,	 don’t
believe	 him,	 just	 ignore	 him	 and	 look	 straight	 into	 my	 heart.	 Life
indeed	 is	 so	 hard	 and	 sad,	 how	 can	 one	 hope	 to	 hold	 anyone	with
nothing	 but	written	words?	 To	 hold	 is	what	 hands	 are	 for.	 But	 this
hand	of	mine	has	held	your	hand,	which	has	become	indispensable	to
my	life,	for	only	three	moments:	when	I	entered	the	room,	when	you
promised	me	the	trip	to	Palestine,	and	when	I,	fool	that	I	am,	allowed
you	to	get	into	the	elevator.
May	I	kiss	you	then?	On	this	miserable	paper?	I	might	as	well	open
the	window	and	kiss	the	night	air.
Dearest,	don’t	be	angry	with	me!	That’s	all	I	ask	of	you.

Franz

[LETTERHEAD:	Workers’	Accident	Insurance	Institute]
[November	21,	1912]

Dearest!	 You	 poor	 child!	 You	 have	 a	 lamentable	 and	 extremely
awkward	admirer.	If	he	is	without	a	letter	from	you	for	two	days,	he
starts	hitting	out	blindly,	 if	only	with	words,	and	at	 the	time	cannot
believe	he	is	hurting	you.	Afterwards,	of	course,	he	is	overcome	with
remorse,	 and	 you	 can	 rest	 assured	 that	 he	 is	made	 to	 suffer	 for	 the
uneasiness	he	caused	you,	down	to	the	slightest	twitching	of	your	lips.
Dearest,	according	to	today’s	two	letters	it	seems	you	are	prepared	to
tolerate	me	a	 little	 longer.	Please,	please,	don’t	 let	 yesterday’s	 letter
change	 your	 mind.	 By	 the	 way,	 I	 shall	 probably	 send	 a	 telegram
today,	to	ask	forgiveness.
But	try	to	understand	my	concern	for	you,	my	terrible	impatience,
the	torment	of	the	one	and	only	thought	in	my	head,	my	incapacity	to
deal	 with	 any	 unrelated	 matter;	 life	 in	 the	 office	 with	 my	 eyes
permanently	 on	 the	 door;	 in	 bed,	 in	 my	mind’s	 eye	 the	 intolerable
thoughts,	the	sleepwalking,	and	the	apathetic	stumbling	about	in	the
streets;	my	 heart	 no	 longer	 beats	 but	 is	 a	 tugging	muscle,	 the	 near
collapse	of	my	writing—try	to	understand	all	this,	and	don’t	be	angry.
Now	I	do	have	the	explanation	for	your	not	writing,	but	listen:	I	didn’t
get	a	single	letter	on	Monday,	the	letter	you	say	I	should	have	had	on



Monday	would	have	 to	have	been	mailed	on	Saturday	evening;	 that
letter	at	any	rate	must	have	been	 lost;	all	 I	got	on	Sunday	was	your
letter	 dated	 Saturday	 morning;	 what	 was	 in	 that	 Saturday	 evening
letter,	 please	 tell	 me,	 if	 you	 still	 remember,	 so	 that	 at	 least	 I	 can
sweeten	the	memory	of	that	terrible	Monday.	Well,	I	had	no	letter	at
all	 on	 Monday,	 on	 Tuesday	 only	 the	 one	 dated	 Sunday,	 and	 the
express	letter	I	had	extorted	by	force;	but	again	on	Wednesday	there
was	no	letter.	That	was	more	than	I	could	bear,	so	yesterday’s	 letter
was	written	 in	order	 to	 rid	myself	of	 some	of	 the	 feelings	 that	were
tearing	at	me.	Just	think,	for	me	there	was	really	no	explanation	other
than	that,	owing	to	some	curse	that	is	upon	me,	you	wanted	to	end	it
all	of	your	own	free	will,	or	 that—and	it	would	come	to	the	same—
your	mother	had	forbidden	you	to	write;	this	mother	who	in	your	first
letters—I	 remember	 it	 well—appeared	 in	 such	 a	 favorable	 light,
waving	 to	 you	 from	 the	 balcony,	 complaining	 of	 your	 meager
breakfast,	telephoning	to	ask	you	to	come	home	when	you	stayed	too
late	 at	 the	 office,	 has	 gradually	 become	 a	 more	 somber	 figure:
demanding	needlework	for	a	birthday	present,	not	 fully	appreciating
your	 office	 work,	 forcing	 you	 to	 pay	 calls,	 in	 your	 opinion
unnecessary	 ones,	 frightening	 you	 “to	 death”	 by	 coming	 into	 your
room	at	 night	when	you	 are	 in	 bed	writing,	 and	 a	 number	 of	 other
things.	 And	 so	 I	 stuck	 grimly	 to	 these	 two	 possible	 explanations;	 I
couldn’t	 get	 away	 from	 them,	and	 so	wrote	 that	 letter.	Now	 I	 see	 it
was	 obviously	 due	 to	 the	 holiday58	 in	 Berlin	 (which	 I	 might	 have
found	in	my	calendar	merely	by	looking)	that	Tuesday’s	letter	did	not
arrive	here	till	today,	Thursday.	Have	all	these	wrongs	been	put	right
once	again	by	your	kindness,	and	may	I	obliterate	these	days,	and	all
despair,	with	one	kiss?
But	 it	 seems	 to	 me	 that	 one	 of	 my	 letters	 must	 have	 been	 lost.

According	 to	my	 rough	calculation,	 I	 have	written	at	 least	14	or	15
letters	 since	 Friday	 [November	 8],	 and	 you	 say	 you	 had	 only	 one
letter	on	Tuesday?	To	check	on	this,	tell	me	whether	you	received	the
letters	 which	 had	 enclosures,	 and	 which	 I	 therefore	 remember
distinctly.	In	one	of	them	I	enclosed	an	old	letter	that	had	never	been
mailed,	 with	 the	 comic	 mode	 of	 address	 dating	 from	 time
immemorial:	“Dear	Fräulein	Bauer”;	another	contained	a	printed	page
with	a	description	of	the	noises	in	this	apartment.59
Yes,	 of	 course	 I	 have	 read	 the	 Strindberg	 quotations,	 and	 can’t

understand	how	I	could	have	failed	to	write	to	you	about	them.	They
are	 terrifying	 truths,	 and	 it	 is	 admirable	 to	 have	 stated	 them	 so



frankly,	but	there	are	times	when	one	fears	that	even	more	terrifying
truths	are	 stirring	within	one.	There	 is	profound	 truth	 in	 this:	When
one	loves,	one	acquires	a	new	self-protection,	avoids	certain	trains	of
thought,	 refuses	 to	 hear	 certain	 words,	 while	 certain	 things,	 which
hitherto	one	had	absorbed	absentmindedly,	one	now	finds	irritating.	It
is	 almost	 impossible	 to	 introduce	 a	 lighter	 diet;	wine	 is	 replaced	by
fruit	juices,	if	one	drinks	at	all,	which	one	rarely	does.
I	eat	three	times	a	day,	nothing	between	meals,	literally	nothing.	In
the	 morning	 stewed	 fruit,	 biscuits,	 and	 milk.	 At	 2:30,	 out	 of	 filial
affection,	 the	 same	 as	 the	 others,	 but	 on	 the	whole	 rather	 less,	 less
meat	in	particular,	even	less	than	a	little,	and	more	vegetables.	Winter
evenings	 at	 9:30:	 yogurt,	 pumpernickel,	 butter,	 all	 kinds	 of	 nuts,
chestnuts,	 dates,	 figs,	 grapes,	 almonds,	 raisins,	 pumpkins,	 bananas,
apples,	 pears,	 oranges.	Needless	 to	 say,	 only	 a	 selection	 of	 all	 these
are	eaten,	not	all	mixed	up	as	though	poured	from	a	horn	of	plenty.
No	food	is	more	stimulating	to	me	than	this.	Please	don’t	insist	on	3
extra	mouthfuls,	everything	is	eaten	for	your	benefit,	and	these	three
mouthfuls	would	be	to	my	detriment.
Don’t	worry	about	your	 letters,	 they	are	 the	only	 things	 in	perfect
order,	 and	 locked	 up,	 within	 the	 gigantic	 disorder	 of	my	 desk,	 and
each	time	I	take	them	out—not	a	rare	occurrence—they	are	put	back
again	 in	 perfect	 order.—Oh	God,	 I	 have	 still	 so	many	 things	 to	 tell
you,	 so	many	questions	 to	answer,	and	 I	have	come	to	 the	end,	and
besides,	 it’s	now	3	o’clock.60	Well,	more	 tomorrow.	Yes,	 if	 you	mail
your	letter	on	Saturday	morning,	I	shall	have	it	on	Sunday,	and	then
my	Sunday	will	be	rather	better	than	usual.

Franz

[IN	THE	TOP	MARGIN]	I’d	better	not	send	a	telegram	after	all.	 It	might	give
you	 an	 unnecessary	 fright.	 In	 the	 4	 letters	 you	 should	 have	 had
today,	the	good	and	the	bad	should	cancel	each	other	out.—Did	you
appear	 as	 “Humor”?	 Is	 there	 a	 picture	 of	 it?	 About	 my	 picture,
tomorrow.

November	21,	1912
My	dearest,	I	now	have	your	telegram	and	realize	the	damage	I	have
done.	Coming	 from	the	office	 I	 sent	you	an	enormous	express	 letter,
but	 in	 my	 absentmindedness	 forgot	 to	 register	 it.	 In	 view	 of	 your



telegram,	 I	 am	 now	 afraid	 that	 the	 express	 letter,	 to	 complete	 my
misfortune,	may	not	arrive,	for	we	seem	to	be	persecuted	by	the	post
office,	 and	 the	 girl	 who	 took	 my	 letter	 was	 rather	 careless	 and
inefficient.	That’s	why	 I	am	 in	a	hurry	 to	 send	 this	 registered	 letter,
since	I’m	not	allowed	to	send	a	telegram.	I	hope	they	will	both	arrive,
and	 you	will	 accept	 them	with	 forgiveness	 and	warmth.	 Terrible	 to
think	 that	 our	 correspondence	 progresses	 amid	 such	 catastrophes.
There	 is	 hardship	 enough	 in	 our	 separation,	 why	 these	 additional
blows?	According	to	your	telegram,	you	wrote	on	Monday	as	well,	in
which	case	you	must	be	 referring	 to	a	Monday	 letter	other	 than	 the
express	 letter	 I	had	already	acknowledged.	 If	 so,	 then	not	only	your
second	 Saturday	 letter	 but	 also	 your	 first	 Monday	 letter	 must	 have
been	 lost.	 This	 really	 would	 be	 disastrous.	 One	 can	 make	 inquiries
about	 lost	 letters,	 and	 this	 I	 could	 have	 done	 with	 regard	 to	 that
earlier	 lost	 letter,	 but	 not	 without	 an	 official	 statement	 from	 you,
which	I	didn’t	want	to	bother	you	with,	so	I	let	it	go	at	the	time,	and
expect	one	may	as	well	let	it	go	this	time.	The	time	you	would	spend
being	 questioned	 by	 some	 post	 office	 official	 could	 be	 better	 spent
sending	me	a	new	little	greeting,	for	the	old	letter	would	remain	lost,
despite	all	investigations.
What	makes	it	worse	is	that	not	only	was	I	completely	shattered	by
it	 all,	 and	 am	 only	 slowly	 recovering,	 thanks	 to	 today’s	 wonderful
letter,	but	I	was	inconsiderate	enough	to	do	my	best	to	draw	you	into
this	suffering.
You	will	write	again,	won’t	you?

Franz

November	21,	1912
Dearest,	it’s	lucky	I	didn’t	write	to	you	two	hours	ago,	or	I	would	have
said	 things	about	my	mother	 for	which	you	would	have	hated	me.	 I
am	 calmer	 now,	 and	 can	write	with	 greater	 confidence.	 I	 still	 don’t
feel	 too	good	 inside,	but	 that	will	 improve,	 if	not	of	 its	own	accord,
then	 for	 love	 of	 you.	 It	 was	 entirely	 my	 fault—unforgivable	 and
criminal—that	my	mother	managed	to	read	one	of	your	letters.	I	have
told	you	before	that	I	am	in	the	habit	of	carrying	your	letters	on	me;
they	 give	 me	 continuous	 support;	 I	 go	 about	 my	 business	 a	 better,
more	 competent	 man.	 Needless	 to	 say,	 I	 no	 longer	 carry	 all	 your
letters	around	with	me,	as	in	those	miserable	early	days,	but	at	least



one	or	two	of	the	most	recent	ones.	That	was	the	cause	of	the	disaster.
On	 arriving	 home,	 I	 usually	 change	my	 coat	 and	 hang	 the	 one	 I’ve
been	wearing	 on	 a	 hanger	 in	my	 room.	My	mother	walked	 through
my	 room	 when	 I	 wasn’t	 there	 (my	 room	 is	 a	 passage,	 or	 rather	 a
thoroughfare	between	the	living	room	and	my	parents’	bedroom),	saw
the	corner	of	the	letter	sticking	out	of	the	inside	pocket,	and,	with	the
inquisitiveness	that	is	part	of	love,	pulled	it	out,	read	it,	and	wrote	to
you.	Her	 love	for	me	is	as	great	as	her	 lack	of	understanding	of	me,
and	her	inconsiderateness,	due	to	this	lack	of	understanding,	becomes
part	of	her	 love,	 and	 is	 greater	 still,	 and	 to	me,	 at	 times,	 altogether
incomprehensible.
I	 am	 going	 to	 deal	with	 all	 of	 today’s	 letters	 as	 one.	 Your	 advice
about	 food	 and	 sleep	 didn’t	 disconcert	 me	 as	 much	 as	 it	 should,
considering	I	had	already	told	you	how	glad	I	am	to	have	found	my
present	way	of	life	as	the	only	moderately	satisfactory	solution	to	the
contradictions	 I	 have	 to	 live	with.	 But	 today,	when	Max	 dropped	 a
delicate	hint	about	 the	keeping	of	 letters	and	about	his	things	never
being	 safe	 from	 his	 parents	 (I	 know	 from	 experience	 his	 father’s
searching	and	prying	 into	every	corner),	his	 remarks	 coincided	with
all	you	say	on	the	subject	in	today’s	letters	(for	today	as	always	your
letters	 were	 as	 present	 to	 me	 as	 is	 the	 expression	 on	 the	 face	 of
someone	 I	 am	 talking	 to),	 and	 I	 soon	 discovered	 perhaps	 not
everything,	but	enough	to	force	Max	to	tell	me	everything.61
I	 can’t	 ask	 you	 to	 forgive	 me;	 how	 could	 even	 you,	 kindest	 of
creatures,	 forgive	 this?	 I	 shall	 have	 to	 bear	 this	 guilt,	 and	 carry	 it
around	with	me.	Everything	had	been	so	good;	I	was	looking	forward
to	enjoying	 in	peace	 the	happiness	you	give	me;	your	 remark	about
the	 Christmas	 holidays	 filled	 me	 with	 infinite	 hope,	 which	 in	 this
morning’s	 letter	 from	my	 sordid	 office	 I	 dared	 not	 even	 mention—
when	along	comes	my	mother	and	wrecks	it	all.	I	have	always	looked
upon	 my	 parents	 as	 persecutors;	 until	 about	 a	 year	 ago	 I	 was
indifferent	to	them	and	perhaps	to	the	world	at	large,	as	some	kind	of
lifeless	 thing,	but	 I	 see	now	 it	was	only	 suppressed	 fear,	worry,	 and
unhappiness.	All	parents	want	to	do	is	drag	one	down	to	them,	back
to	the	old	days	from	which	one	longs	to	free	oneself	and	escape;	they
do	 it	 out	 of	 love,	 of	 course,	 and	 that’s	what	makes	 it	 so	 horrible.	 I
must	stop,	the	end	of	the	page	comes	as	a	warning	that	 it	might	get
too	wild.

Yours,	yours,	yours.



On	a	separate	page,	enclosed:
November	21,	1912

I	am	enclosing	a	snapshot	of	myself	when	I	was	perhaps	5	years	old;
at	the	time	the	angry	expression	was	put	on	as	a	joke,	now	I	suspect	it
was	 secretly	meant.	 But	 you	must	 send	 it	 back,	 it	 is	 owned	 by	my
parents,	 who	 own	 everything,	 and	 want	 to	 be	 part	 of	 everything.
(Today	of	 all	 days	 I	 had	 to	write	 about	 your	mother!)	When	you’ve
sent	it	back,	I’ll	send	you	others,	including	a	recent	bad	and	silly	one,
which	you	may	keep	 if	 you	 like.	 I	 can’t	have	been	 five	years	old	 in
this	photograph,	more	likely	two;	but	as	a	lover	of	children	you	will
be	 the	 better	 judge.	When	 children	 are	 around	 I	 prefer	 to	 close	my
eyes.

Franz

This	would	be	the	most	 inappropriate	moment	 to	ask	you	to	give	or
lend	me	a	photograph	of	yourself.	I	just	mention	it.

November	22,	1912
Dearest,	 I	haven’t	 time	 to	apologize	 for	 the	distress	 I	 caused	you	on
Thursday,	which	shows	so	clearly	in	your	letter	of	today	that	even	a
deluded	fool	would	be	moved	to	pity.	But	not	I,	I	just	go	on	sinning,
and	whatever	I	do	turns	to	hostility	toward	you,	while	another	part	of
my	being	wants	 to	 throw	 itself	at	your	 feet,	as	 though	 I	had	always
existed	 for	 you	 alone.	 Not	 enough	 that	 I	 leave	 your	 letter	 in	 my
pocket,	that	my	mother	reads	it,	and	writes	to	you.	That	would	have
been	a	guilt	 I	 could,	 in	 time,	have	come	 to	 terms	with.	But	a	guilty
man	 burrows	 deeper	 and	 deeper	 into	 his	 guilt.	 When	 I	 saw	 Max
yesterday,	 it	 all	 seemed	 bad,	 but	 not	 intolerable;	 I	 promised	 him,	 I
may	even	have	sworn,	that	I	wouldn’t	breathe	a	word	to	my	mother.
And	even	if	 I	hadn’t	sworn,	 it	would	have	been	the	obvious	thing	to
do,	out	of	consideration	for	you.	But	how	can	I	find	the	composure	for
consideration,	even	for	that	which	I	hold	most	dear?	As	soon	as	I	left
Max	to	go	for	a	little	walk,	I	began	to	boil	inside,	I	was	fuming	with
rage,	and	when	I	came	home	I	was	convinced	that	if	I	didn’t	have	it
out	with	my	mother,	I	would	never	be	able	to	speak	to	her	again.	We
had	visitors—my	future	brother-in-law62	and	one	of	his	friends.	I	went
straight	to	my	room,	well	aware	that	I	would	not	be	able	to	stand	it



there;	I	was	amazed	that	the	apartment	didn’t	disintegrate,	such	was
the	tension	within	me.	With	some	kind	of	premonition	my	mother	had
started	 shuffling	 about	 in	 the	 hall.	 And	 so	we	 inevitably	met,	 and	 I
told	 her	 what	 I	 thought,	 told	 it	 to	 her	 in	 an	 utterly	 uncontrolled
outburst.	 I	 am	convinced	 it	was	good	 for	us	both,	 for	my	mother	as
well	as	for	me,	and	I	can’t	remember	ever	in	my	life	having	spoken	to
her	 as	 freely	 as	 I	 did	 afterwards.	 I	 have	 never	 found	 in	 any	 family,
whether	 of	 friends	 or	 relations,	 as	 much	 coldness	 and	 false
friendliness	as	I	have	always	felt	obliged	to	show	toward	my	parents
(through	my	fault	as	well	as	theirs).	In	spite	of	her	worries,	I	can	see
how	 pleased	 my	 mother	 is	 with	 our	 present	 relationship,	 after	 the
unpleasantness	of	 last	night.	Here	as	everywhere	for	me,	you	were	a
guardian	angel.	But	that’s	not	really	the	point.	For	your	sake	I	should
have	 said	nothing	 to	my	mother,	yet	 I	did.	Dearest,	 can	you	 forgive
this,	 too?	 Soon	 I	 shall	 have	 accumulated	 so	much	 guilt	 toward	 you
that	even	human	judges	will	know	how	much	I	am	in	your	debt;	as	for
the	Judges	on	High,	they	have	known	it	for	a	long	time.
Do	I	still	have	the	right	to	accept	the	kiss	of	reconciliation	you	offer
at	the	end	of	your	letter,	especially	since	it	would	be	a	kiss	that	would
prevent	both	your	letter	and	mine	from	ever	ending?

Franz

Max	Brod	to	Felice	Bauer
Prague,	Post	Office	Department,	November	22,	1912

My	dear	Fräulein	Bauer,
It	seems	that	in	some	way	your	letter	had	prepared	Franz,	for	when
I	 gave	him	a	hint	 he	 guessed	 at	 once	 and	 I	 could	not	 deny	 that	 his
mother	had	read	your	letter,	etc.—In	any	case,	this	whole	matter	has
turned	out	well	and	he	will	be	more	careful	from	now	on.
As	for	that	letter,	there	is	not	much	I	need	say:	Franz’s	mother	loves
him	very	much,	but	she	has	not	the	faintest	idea	who	her	son	is	and
what	his	needs	are.	Literature	is	a	“pastime”!	My	God!	As	though	it	did
not	 eat	 our	 hearts	 out,	 willing	 victims	 though	we	 are.—Frau	 Kafka
and	 I	 have	 often	 had	 words	 over	 this.	 All	 the	 love	 in	 the	 world	 is
useless	when	 there	 is	 total	 lack	of	understanding.	That	 letter	proves
this	yet	again.—After	years	of	trial	and	error	Franz	has	at	 last	found
the	only	diet	that	suits	him,	the	vegetarian	one.	For	years	he	suffered
from	 his	 stomach;	 now	 he	 is	 as	 healthy	 and	 as	 fit	 as	 I	 have	 ever



known	him.	Then	along	come	his	parents,	of	course,	and	in	the	name
of	love	try	to	force	him	back	into	eating	meat	and	being	ill.—It	is	just
the	same	with	his	sleeping	habits.	At	last	he	has	found	what	suits	him
best,	he	can	sleep,	can	do	his	duty	in	that	senseless	office,	and	get	on
with	his	 literary	work.	But	then	his	parents	…	This	really	makes	me
bitter.—Franz,	thank	God,	is	gratifyingly	stubborn	and	sticks	precisely
to	 what	 is	 good	 for	 him.	 His	 parents	 just	 will	 not	 see	 that	 an
exceptional	man	 like	Franz	needs	exceptional	conditions	 to	prevent	his
sensitive	spirit	from	withering.	The	other	day	I	had	to	write	an	8-page
letter	 to	Frau	Kafka	about	this.	His	parents	wanted	Franz	to	work	in
the	 factory63	 in	 the	 afternoons;	 whereupon	 Franz	 firmly	 resolved	 to
commit	suicide	and	went	so	far	as	to	send	me	a	farewell	letter.	Only	by
ruthless	 intervention	 did	 I	 succeed	 at	 the	 last	moment	 in	 protecting
him	from	his	“loving”	parents.
If	his	parents	 love	him	 so	much,	why	don’t	 they	give	him	30,000

gulden	as	they	would	to	a	daughter,	so	that	he	could	leave	the	office,
go	off	to	some	cheap	little	place	on	the	Riviera	to	create	those	works
that	God,	using	Franz’s	brain,	wishes	the	world	to	have.—So	long	as
Franz	is	not	in	a	position	to	do	this,	he	will	never	be	entirely	happy.
His	whole	disposition	 cries	 out	 for	 a	 peaceful,	 trouble-free	 existence
dedicated	to	writing.	In	the	present	circumstances	his	life	is	a	kind	of
vegetating,	with	a	 few	bright	moments.—You	will	now	more	readily
understand	his	nervousness.
A	fine	book	of	Kafka’s	is	about	to	appear.	Perhaps	he	will	be	lucky

with	 it	 and	 can	 start	 a	 life	 devoted	 entirely	 to	 writing.	 He	 is	 also
writing	a	long	novel,	has	reached	chapter	7,	and	I	think	it	promises	to
be	a	great	success.
I	don’t	like	talking	about	Nornepygge;	of	all	my	work	this	is	the	one

book	from	which	I	feel	completely	estranged.	Thank	you	for	your	kind
interest.

With	kind	regards,	yours	sincerely,	Max	Brod

November	23,	1912
Dearest,	oh	God,	how	 I	 love	you!	 It	 is	very	 late	at	night;	 I	have	put
aside	my	little	story,	on	which	I	really	haven’t	worked	at	all	these	last
two	 evenings,	 and	 which	 is	 quietly	 developing	 into	 a	 much	 bigger
story.	How	could	I	give	it	to	you	to	read,	even	if	it	were	finished?	It	is
rather	 illegible,	 and	 even	 if	 that	 weren’t	 an	 obstacle—up	 to	 now	 I



certainly	haven’t	spoiled	you	with	beautiful	writing—I	don’t	want	to
send	you	anything	to	read.	I	want	to	read	it	to	you.	Yes,	that	would	be
lovely,	 to	 read	 this	 story	 to	 you,	 while	 I	 would	 have	 to	 hold	 your
hand,	 for	 the	 story	 is	 a	 little	 frightening.	 It	 is	 called	Metamorphosis,
and	 it	 would	 thoroughly	 scare	 you,	 you	 might	 not	 want	 to	 hear	 a
word	 of	 it,	 for	 alas!	 I	 scare	 you	 enough	 every	 day	with	my	 letters.
Dearest,	 on	 this	 better	writing	paper	 let	 us	 start	 a	 better	 life.	While
writing	 that	 last	 sentence,	 I	 caught	 myself	 looking	 heavenward,	 as
though	you	were	up	there.	If	only	you	weren’t,	which	indeed	you	are,
but	down	here	with	me	in	the	depths.	And	don’t	deceive	yourself,	they
are	great	depths,	the	more	calmly	we	write	to	each	other	from	now	on
—may	God	grant	us	 that	at	 last—the	more	clearly	you	will	 see	 it.	 If
only	you	will	stay	with	me,	in	spite	of	it!	Well,	perhaps	serenity	and
strength	 are	 destined	 to	 be	 where	 restlessness	 and	 weakness	 need
them.
I	 am	 too	 depressed	 at	 the	 moment,	 and	 perhaps	 I	 shouldn’t	 be
writing	at	all.	But	my	story’s	hero	has	also	had	a	very	bad	time	today,
and	 yet	 it	 is	 only	 the	 last	 lap	 of	 his	 misfortune,	 which	 is	 now
becoming	permanent.	So	how	can	I	be	particularly	cheerful!	But	if	this
letter	serves	as	an	example	to	you	never	to	tear	up	a	single	scrap	you
have	written	 to	me,	 then	 it	 is,	after	all,	a	worthwhile	and	 important
letter.	But	 you	mustn’t	 think	 I	 am	always	 so	 sad.	 I’m	not.	With	one
exception,	 I	 have	 no	 reason	 to	 complain	 too	much;	 and	 everything,
with	 the	exception	of	 this	one	hopelessly	black	 spot,	 could	 still	 turn
out	well,	be	pleasant	and,	with	your	help,	wonderful.	On	Sunday,	if	I
have	the	time	and	ability,	 I	want	to	pour	 it	all	out	 to	you,	and	with
your	 hands	 in	 your	 lap	 you	 can	 watch	 the	 great	 flood.	 But	 now,
dearest,	 I’m	 off	 to	 bed.	May	 you	 be	 given	 a	 pleasant	 Sunday,	 and	 I
some	of	your	thoughts.

Franz

November	24,	1912
[Begun	during	the	night	of	November	23	to	24]

Dearest,	 once	 again	 I	 am	 putting	 aside	 this	 exceptionally	 repulsive
story	in	order	to	refresh	myself	by	thinking	of	you.	By	now	it	is	more
than	half	finished,	and	on	the	whole	I	am	not	too	dissatisfied;	but	it	is
infinitely	 repulsive,	 and	 these	 things,	 you	 see,	 spring	 from	 the	 same
heart	in	which	you	dwell	and	which	you	tolerate	as	a	dwelling	place.



But	don’t	be	unhappy	about	it,	for	who	knows,	the	more	I	write	and
the	more	I	liberate	myself,	the	cleaner	and	the	worthier	of	you	I	may
become,	but	no	doubt	there	is	a	great	deal	more	to	be	got	rid	of,	and
the	 nights	 can	 never	 be	 long	 enough	 for	 this	 business	 which,
incidentally,	is	highly	voluptuous.
Now,	before	I	go	to	sleep	(it	 is	actually	3	A.M.,	usually	I	only	work
till	1;	you	must	have	misunderstood	one	of	my	last	letters,	I	meant	3
in	 the	 afternoon;	 I	 stayed	 on	 in	 the	 office	 and	 wrote	 from	 there),
because	it	 is	your	wish	and	because	it	 is	so	simple,	I	will	whisper	in
your	ear	how	much	I	love	you.	I	love	you	so	much,	Felice,	that	if	I	can
keep	 you	 I	 should	 want	 to	 live	 forever,	 but	 only,	 it	 must	 be
remembered,	as	a	healthy	person	and	your	equal.	Well,	that’s	how	it
is,	and	you	should	know	it,	and	indeed	it	is	almost	beyond	kissing,	the
awareness	of	which	 leaves	me	with	almost	nothing	 to	do	but	 stroke
your	 hand.	 And	 this	 is	 why	 I	 would	 rather	 call	 you	 Felice	 than
dearest,	and	rather	Du	than	darling.	But	since	I	want	to	relate	as	many
things	as	I	can	to	you,	I	also	like	calling	you	dearest,	and	am	happy	to
be	able	to	call	you	anything.

Sunday	[November	24,	1912],	after	lunch
Two	letters!	Two	letters!	No	Sunday	could	live	up	to	such	a	start!	But
now,	 dearest,	 since	 you	 have	 not	 only	 forgiven	me	 but	 also	 see	my
point,	 we	 should,	 shouldn’t	 we,	 Felice,	 whatever	 happens,	 remain
calm	and	love	each	other	without	further	trouble.	I	wish	I	were	strong
enough	to	make	you	lively	and	gay	again	with	my	letters,	as,	alas,	 I
was	 weak	 enough	 to	 make	 you	 tired	 and	 tearful.	 I	 almost	 think	 I
could.	 But	 if	 I	 succeed,	 it	 will	 be	 due	 entirely	 to	 the	 fortifying
knowledge	 of	 having	 you	 as	 a	 friend,	 and	 being	 able	 to	 rely	 on
someone	like	you.
But	 dearest,	 please,	 please	 don’t	 ever	 again	write	 at	 night;	 I	 read
these	 letters	 that	 cost	 you	 your	 sleep	 with	 a	 mixture	 of	 joy	 and
sorrow.	Don’t	do	it	again;	sleep	peacefully,	as	you	deserve;	I	couldn’t
work	 properly	 if	 I	 knew	 you	 were	 still	 awake—above	 all	 on	 my
account.	But	knowing	you	are	asleep,	I	work	with	greater	courage,	for
then	 I	 imagine	 that	 you	 have	 completely	 surrendered	 to	 my	 care,
helpless	 in	 your	 healthy	 sleep,	 and	 in	 need	 of	 help,	 and	 that	 I	 am
working	 for	you	and	 for	your	good.	With	 these	 thoughts,	how	could
my	work	fail	to	progress!	So	sleep,	sleep,	think	how	much	more	work
you	do	in	the	daytime	than	I.	Go	to	sleep	tomorrow	without	fail,	write



no	more	letters	in	bed;	if	my	wish	is	powerful	enough,	you	won’t	even
do	it	today.	Then,	before	going	to	bed,	you	may	throw	your	supply	of
aspirin	 tablets	 out	 of	 the	window.	Well,	 no	more	 late	writing,	 leave
writing	at	night	 to	me,	give	me	 this	 faint	chance	 to	be	proud	of	my
nightwork,	it	is	the	only	pride	I	feel	vis-à-vis	you;	without	it	I	should
be	too	submissive,	and	surely	you	would	not	like	that	either.	But	wait
a	moment,	to	prove	that	nightwork	everywhere,	even	in	China,	is	left
to	men,	 I’ll	go	to	the	bookshelf	 (it’s	 in	 the	next	room)	to	get	a	book
and	copy	out	 for	you	a	short	Chinese	poem.	Well,	here	 it	 is	 (what	a
noise	my	father	 is	making	with	his	nephew!):	 It	 is	by	 the	poet	Yüan
Tzu-tsai	(1716–97),	on	whom	I	find	the	comment:	“Very	talented	and
precocious,	 had	 a	 brilliant	 career	 in	 the	 civil	 service.	 He	 was
uncommonly	 versatile	 both	 as	 man	 and	 artist.”	 To	 understand	 the
poem	one	should	know	that	well-to-do	Chinese	sprinkle	their	sleeping
quarters	with	fragrant	essences	before	going	to	sleep.	The	poem	may
be	 very	 slightly	 improper,	 but	 its	 lack	 of	 propriety	 is	 amply
compensated	for	by	its	beauty.	Here	it	is	at	last:

IN	THE	DEAD	OF	NIGHT

In	the	cold	night,	while	poring	over	my	book,
I	forgot	the	hour	of	bedtime.
The	scent	of	my	gold-embroidered	bedcover
Has	already	evaporated,
The	fire	in	the	hearth	burns	no	more.
My	beautiful	mistress,	who	hitherto	has	controlled
Her	wrath	with	difficulty,	snatches	away	the	lamp,
And	asks:	Do	you	know	how	late	it	is?64

Well?	 This	 is	 a	 poem	 one	 has	 to	 savor	 to	 the	 full.	 It	 reminds	 me,
incidentally,	 of	 three	 things,	 but	 I	 won’t	 try	 to	 examine	 the
associations.
First	of	all,	I	am	delighted	that	you	are	a	vegetarian	at	heart.	I	don’t
like	 strict	 vegetarians	 all	 that	 much,	 because	 I	 too	 am	 almost	 a
vegetarian,	 and	 see	 nothing	 particularly	 likable	 about	 it,	 just
something	 natural,	 and	 those	 who	 are	 good	 vegetarians	 in	 their
hearts,	but,	for	reasons	of	health,	from	indifference,	or	simply	because
they	underrate	food	as	such,	eat	meat	or	whatever	happens	to	be	on



the	table,	casually,	with	their	left	hand,	so	to	speak,	these	are	the	ones
I	like.	It’s	a	pity	that	my	love	for	you	advanced	so	fast,	that	there	is	no
room	left	to	love	you	more	for	what	you	eat.	And	you	share	my	craze
for	 sleeping	 with	 the	 window	 open?	 Open	 the	 whole	 year	 around?
Even	in	winter?	Wide	open?	That	would	be	going	one	better	than	me,
for	in	the	winter	I	open	it	only	a	little,	one	tiny	crack.	True,	I	look	out
onto	 a	 large	 empty	 lot,	 beyond	 which	 flows	 the	Moldau.65	 And	 on
rising	ground	immediately	beyond	the	river	are	public	gardens.	So	we
get	 a	 lot	 of	 air	 and	wind	 and	 cold,	 and	 though	 you	may	 still	 leave
your	 window	 wide	 open	 in	 the	 Immanuel-Kirchstrasse,	 it’s	 by	 no
means	 certain	 that	 you	 would	 do	 so	 in	 a	 room	 situated	 like	 mine.
Besides,	I	beat	you	in	this:	my	room	has	no	heating	whatever,	yet	here
is	 where	 I	 do	 my	 writing.	 I’ve	 just	 noticed	 (I	 am	 sitting	 by	 the
window)	that	the	inside	window	is	wide	open,	the	outside	one	barely
closed,	while	the	balustrade	on	the	bridge	down	below	is	covered,	not
in	snow,	but	white	frost.	Now	you	try	and	compete	with	that!
The	 poem	 by	 your	 little	 ladies	 is	 splendid.66	 I	 am	 of	 course
returning	 it,	 but	 I	 have	 made	 a	 copy.	 But	 to	 punish	 your	 Fräulein
Brühl	for	wishing	you	a	husband	with	a	“von”	to	his	name,	or	rather
wishing	you	for	him,	I	would	like	her	to	have	the	following	birthday
present:	as	from	tonight,	night	after	night,	after	office	hours,	 for	one
whole	year	until	her	next	birthday,	two	mad	managers	will	come	up
to	her	and,	one	on	either	side	of	her,	will	dictate	 letters	unceasingly
and	simultaneously	until	midnight.	And	only	because	she	writes	such
pretty	verse	would	I	be	prepared,	should	you	intercede	on	her	behalf,
to	 reduce	her	 sentence	 to	 six	months.	But	because	you	 like	her,	and
because	 she	 amuses	 herself	 so	 prettily,	 I	 shall	 send	 her	 a	 picture
postcard	 from	 Kratzau	 (that’s	 up	 in	 the	 mountains	 behind
Reichenberg)	where	unfortunately	I	have	to	go	tomorrow,	and	on	it,
in	an	unknown	hand	and	without	a	 signature,	 I	will	get	 someone	 to
write:	“Congratulations.	But	ah!	Who	from?”
I’ve	been	meaning	to	ask	you	for	a	long	time,	and	always	it	slips	my
mind,	 how	 it	 is	 that	 you	 take,	 let	 alone	 read,	 so	 many	 and	 such
diverse	 publications	 which	 you	 mentioned	 in	 your	 second	 letter	 as
being	among	your	daily	mail?	You	mentioned	so	many,	and	still	add
“etc.”	If	that	is	so—i.e.,	 if	 I	understood	right,	then	we	could	start	an
additional	 exchange	 between	 us.	 I	 can’t	 lay	my	 hands	 on	 too	many
things	 that	 you	 have	 held	 in	 your	 hands,	 and	 I	 can’t	 send	 you	 too
many	 things	 that	 concern	me.	 For	 a	 long	 time	now	 I	 have	 planned,
and	only	my	indolence	has	prevented	me	repeatedly	from	carrying	it



through,	 to	 cut	out	 and	 collect	 from	various	papers	news	 items	 that
astonished	 me	 for	 some	 reason,	 that	 affected	 me,	 that	 seemed
important	to	me	personally	for	a	long	time	to	come;	at	a	glance,	they
were	 usually	 quite	 insignificant,	 for	 instance	 just	 recently	 “The
beatification	of	22	Christian	Negro	youths	in	Uganda”—(which	I	have
just	come	across	and	am	enclosing).67	I	find	something	of	the	kind	in
the	 papers	 nearly	 every	 other	 day.	 News	which	 seems	 to	 be	meant
only	for	me,	but	I	haven’t	got	the	patience	to	start	the	collection	for
myself,	let	alone	keep	it	up.	But	I	should	do	it	with	pleasure	for	you,
and	you,	if	it	would	amuse	you,	could	do	it	for	me.	I	am	sure	everyone
feels	 there	 are	 certain	 news	 items	 not	 meant	 for	 every	 reader,	 but
aimed	only	 at	 certain	 readers	 here	 and	 there,	 in	which	 the	 outsider
could	detect	no	reason	for	special	interest,	and	such	bits	of	news	that
specially	affect	you	I	should	value	more	than	any	collection	of	mine,
which	 I	 would	 send	 you	 without	 much	 regret.	 But	 don’t
misunderstand	 me:	 I	 mean	 only	 small	 clippings	 from	 daily	 papers,
chiefly	about	actual	happenings;	clippings	from	magazines	should	be
rare	 exceptions;	 don’t	 think	 I	 want	 you	 to	 cut	 your	 beautiful
periodicals	 to	pieces	 for	me.	Besides,	 I	 read	only	 the	Prager	Tagblatt,
and	 that	 only	 very	 fleetingly,	 and	 of	 magazines	 only	 the	 Neue
Rundschau,68	and	also	Palästina,	which	they	have	stopped	sending	me,
though	I	am	still	a	subscriber.	(They	probably	think	they	did	more	for
me	 with	 that	 one	 copy	 the	 night	 we	 met	 than	 they	 do	 for	 other
subscribers	 in	 the	 course	 of	 a	 whole	 year—and	 they	 are	 right.)	 To
start	 the	 collection	 with	 a	 fitting	 contribution,	 I	 am	 enclosing	 the
report	of	a	nasty	trial.69
Now	that	 I	mentioned	my	trip	 to	Kratzau,	 I	can’t	get	 the	 tiresome
thought	 out	 of	 my	 head.	My	 little	 story	 would	 certainly	 have	 been
finished	tomorrow,	but	now	I	have	to	leave	at	6	tomorrow	evening;	I
get	to	Reichenberg	at	10,	and	go	on	to	Kratzau	at	7	the	next	morning
to	 appear	 in	 court.	 I	 have	 the	 firm	 intention	 of	 making	 such	 a
complete	fool	of	myself	in	this	rather	complicated	and	risky	case	that
no	one	will	ever	send	me	off	on	that	kind	of	job	again.	Anyway,	I	am
hoping	to	be	back	in	Prague	by	4	o’clock	on	Tuesday	afternoon,	and
will	go	straight	to	the	office,	just	in	case	(but	I	won’t	be	at	all	anxious,
not	 in	 the	 least	 bit	 anxious)	 there	 is	 a	 letter	 from	 you,	 and	 then,
content	 if	 there	 is	one,	 composed	 if	 there	 isn’t,	 I	 shall	 go	home	and
straight	 to	 bed.	 If	 this	 plan	 is	 to	 succeed,	 I	 shall	 have	 to	 finish	my
business	 in	 court	 at	 Kratzau	 in	 less	 than	 3	 hours;	 so	 I	 am	 seriously
thinking	of	 gradually	 fainting	 away	 toward	 the	 end	of	 the	3rd	hour



and	being	hurriedly	carried	off	to	the	station.	In	lieu	of	my	signature,
the	 court	 proceedings	 will	 say:	 “The	 representative	 of	 the	Workers’
Accident	Insurance	Institute	(not	Company,	dearest!)	fainted,	and	had
to	be	removed.”	Just	think	how	doubly	revived	I	shall	be	on	the	train,
and	how	I	shall	race	to	Prague!
Oh	dear,	there	is	still	so	much	to	say,	and	so	many	questions	to	ask,

but	 it	 is	 so	 late,	 and	 I	 can’t	 go	 on.	As	usual	 on	 Sunday,	 I	went	 this
morning	to	see	Baum	(do	you	know	Oskar	Baum?70)	and	read	to	them
(Max	was	there	too,	with	his	fiancée)	the	first	part	of	my	little	story.71
Later	a	girl	arrived,	who	in	some	way	reminded	me	slightly	of	you	(it
doesn’t	 take	much	for	me	to	be	reminded	of	you).	 I	was	spellbound,
and	after	my	eyes	had	exhausted	 the	slight	 resemblance	 I	wanted	 to
go	to	the	window,	look	out,	see	no	one,	and	be	wholly	yours.
I	am	on	very	good	terms	with	my	mother.	We	are	even	developing	a

satisfactory	 relationship;	 our	 common	 blood	 is	 beginning	 to	 make
sense,	she	seems	to	love	you.	She	has	even	written	you	a	letter,	but	I
wouldn’t	 let	her	mail	 it,	 it	was	 too	meek;	 it	was	 the	kind	of	 letter	 I
should	have	demanded	on	that	bad	evening,	and	that	wouldn’t	have
been	right.	Soon,	I	think,	she	will	write	you	a	calm,	friendly	letter.
So	I	am	not	to	have	a	picture	of	you?	And	no	one	took	a	photograph

of	“Humor”?	Strange	people,	 to	miss	 such	an	opportunity.	Are	 there
no	group	photos	of	employees?	Views	of	the	offices?	The	factory?	The
Immanuel-Kirchstrasse?	 No	 factory	 brochure?	 The	 address	 of	 your
Prague	branch?	What	does	your	 job	entail?	 I	 am	 interested	 in	every
little	 detail	 of	 your	 office	 (in	 contrast	 to	 mine).	 What	 attractive
slogans	you	use!	You	are	 in	 the	 record	office?	What	exactly	 is	 that?
How	 can	 you	 dictate	 to	 two	 girls	 simultaneously?	 If	 you	 send	 me
something	attractive	 from	your	office,	 I	will	 send	you	my	 Institute’s
annual	reports	with	some	extremely	interesting	articles	by	me.72
And	now	I	embrace	you	in	farewell.

Franz

November	24,	1912
With	 extreme	 cunning—and	 to	distinguish	myself	 by	my	 cunning	 in
the	eyes	of	the	beloved—I	am	sending	each	page	of	this	Sunday	letter
(there	are	five)	in	a	separate	envelope	on	the	assumption	that	the	post
office,	though	it	seems	to	plague	us,	won’t	lose	them	all	(even	though
it’s	 Sunday,	 and	 they	 can’t	 be	 registered).	 On	 the	 other	 hand,	 this



method	increases	the	risk	of	one	page	or	another	getting	lost;	well,	I’m
doing	my	best	and	will	not	invite	danger	by	mentioning	further	fears.

On	Wednesday,	dearest,	you	probably	won’t	get	a	letter,	more	likely	a
picture	postcard,	but	preferably	to	your	apartment,	so	as	not	to	attract
your	little	lady’s	attention.

Please	write	and	tell	me	exactly	how	well	you	are.	These	headaches!
These	 tears!	This	nervousness!	Dearest,	 I	 beg	of	you,	 sleep	properly,
go	 for	 walks,	 and	 if	 when	 reading	 my	 letter	 you	 sense	 something
unpleasant	approaching,	 something	 I	 should	have	 left	unsaid,	 tear	 it
up	at	once,	don’t	hesitate!	But	remain	calm,	calm.	One	letter	is	of	no
consequence,	 I’ll	write	 ten	for	 the	one,	and	should	you	tear	up	10,	 I
will	replace	them	with	100.

Yours,	Franz

Wouldn’t	 it	 be	 better	 for	 you	 to	 spend	 the	 summer	 in	 a
sanatorium?	 Before	 long	 I	 will	 send	 you	 a	 very	 tempting
description.

Did	you	ever	bother	to	find	out	whether	the	Jews	are	playing	in
Berlin?73	I	think	they	must	be.	Unfortunately	I	haven’t	answered
Löwy’s	letter	yet;	what	I	told	you	in	my	first	letter,	namely,	that	I
am	an	erratic	letter	writer,	still	holds	good	today.

The	 yearbook	 [Arkadia]	won’t	 be	 out	 before	 February.	My	 own
little	 book	 [Meditation]	 will	 appear	 either	 next	 month	 or	 in
January.	Needless	to	say,	you	will	get	them	both	as	soon	as	they
are	published.	I	deliberately	didn’t	write	anything	in	the	Flaubert
[Education	sentimentale];	 it	 is	 a	 book	 that	 should	not	have	other
people’s	 writing	 in	 it.	 Besides,	 I	 am	 not	 at	 all	 sure	 that	 I	 am
capable	of	saying	anything	to	you	that	could	be	seen	by	the	world
at	large.

Yours

Sunday	night,	November	25,	1912
[Night	of	Sunday,	November	24,	to	Monday,	November	25,	1912]

Well	today,	dearest,	I	shall	have	to	put	aside	my	story,	I	have	worked



on	 it	 today	 nowhere	 near	 as	much	 as	 yesterday,	 and	 on	 account	 of
that	maddening	trip	to	Kratzau	I	will	have	to	let	it	wait	for	a	day	or
two.	 This	 grieves	 me,	 but	 I	 hope	 the	 story	 won’t	 suffer	 too	 much,
though	I	shall	need	another	3–4	evenings	to	finish	it.	By	“won’t	suffer
too	 much,”	 I	 mean	 that	 my	 story,	 alas,	 has	 already	 been	 harmed
enough	through	my	method	of	working.	This	kind	of	story	should	be
written	with	no	more	than	one	interruption,	in	two	10-hour	sessions;
then	it	would	have	its	natural	spontaneous	flow,	as	it	had	in	my	head
last	Sunday.	But	I	haven’t	got	twice	10	hours	at	my	disposal.	So	one
has	to	try	to	do	the	best	one	can,	since	the	very	best	has	been	denied
to	one.	What	a	pity	I	can’t	read	it	to	you—a	great	pity.	Every	Sunday
morning,	 for	 instance.	Not	 in	 the	 afternoon,	 I	wouldn’t	 have	 time,	 I
would	be	writing	to	you.	Today	I	actually	wrote	until	6:15	P.M.,	 then
went	 to	 bed,	 though	 I	 should	 have	mailed	 the	 letters	 first,	 but	was
afraid	I	should	get	to	bed	too	late,	and	would	then	be	unable	to	sleep,
for	 as	 soon	 as	 they	 get	 together	 next	 door	 and	 start	 playing	 cards
(perhaps	the	only	thing	in	which	I	couldn’t	force	myself	to	participate,
even	for	my	father’s	sake,	except	on	the	rarest	occasions),	there	is	no
more	 peace	 for	 me.	 But	 tonight	 I	 needn’t	 have	 worried;	 I	 had	 not
realized	 that	my	 parents	 and	my	 youngest	 sister	were	 spending	 the
evening	 with	 my	 married	 sister,	 while	 the	 middle	 one	 went	 to	 the
country	with	her	fiancé	to	see	her	future	in-laws.	Nevertheless	I	slept
badly,	obviously	a	punishment	for	not	having	mailed	the	letters;	since
I	was	alone	in	the	apartment,	except	for	the	maid—she	is	17	but	quiet
as	a	mouse—no	one	woke	me;	there	I	was,	dozing,	and	since	my	room
is	as	cold	as	the	grave,	I	couldn’t	even	make	the	effort	to	reach	for	my
watch.	When	 I	 finally	did,	 I	 saw	 to	my	horror	 that	 it	was	9:30.	 For
heaven’s	sake,	will	it	be	too	late	to	mail	the	letters?	Frantic	exercises
for	2	minutes—described,	perhaps,	once	before—with	windows	wide
open,	 getting	 dressed,	 and	 off	 to	 the	 station.	 Outside	 the	 house—in
our	 somewhat	 deserted	 neighborhood	 doors	 are	 now	 locked	 at	 9—I
just	 managed	 to	 avoid	 my	 family,	 who	 were	 on	 their	 way	 home;	 I
quickly	took	a	side	turning,	and	fled	to	the	station.	I’ve	got	a	new	pair
of	shoes,	and	stump	something	terrible	along	the	empty	streets.	I	hope
at	least	that	the	letters	arrive	in	good	time.	I	return	immediately	and
have	 my	 supper	 as	 usual,	 my	 youngest	 sister	 keeps	 me	 company,
cracks	nuts,	 eats	more	herself	 than	 she	 gives	 to	me,	 and	we	usually
enjoy	 ourselves	 very	much.	 That’s	 supper,	 but	 then	 there	 are	 times
when	 even	 my	 favorite	 sister	 is	 not	 enough,	 and	 when	 I	 am	 not



enough	for	her.
Franz

Shortly	before	leaving,	November	24	[25],	1912
Dearest,	how	upset	one	gets	when	there	is	something	to	worry	about.
There	were	days	when	 I	waited	calmly	 for	your	 letters,	picked	 them
up	calmly,	read	them	once,	put	them	in	my	pocket,	read	them	again,
put	 them	away	again,	but	 all	 in	perfect	 calm.	There	are	other	days,
and	today	is	one	of	them,	when	I	tremble	with	intolerable	excitement
waiting	 for	your	 letter,	when	 I	pick	 it	up	 like	some	 living	 thing	and
cannot	bear	to	let	it	go.
Dearest,	have	you	noticed	how	astonishingly	of	one	mind	we	are	in
our	letters?	If	there	is	a	question	in	one,	the	following	morning	brings
the	answer.	The	other	day,	for	instance,	when	you	wanted	me	to	say	I
love	 you,	 I	 had	 felt	 compelled	 to	 put	 the	 answer	 in	 the	 letter	 that
crossed	 yours	 that	 night	 somewhere	 between	 here	 and	 Berlin;	 but
perhaps	 it	was	obvious	 anyway	 from	 the	opening	words	of	my	very
first	letter,	or	even	from	the	first	casual	look	I	gave	you	that	evening.
There	have	been	so	many	examples	of	our	mutual	understanding	that
I	have	lost	count.	But	the	best	came	today.
As	 I	 told	 you	 yesterday,	 I	 am	 going	 away	 this	 evening,	 alone,	 at
night,	into	the	mountains,	and	though	you	couldn’t	have	known,	you
send	me	this	charming	little	companion.	What	a	delightful	 little	girl!
The	narrow	shoulders!	So	fragile	and	easy	to	hold!	She	is	so	modest,
but	calm.	No	one	had	worried	her	 in	 those	days,	and	made	her	cry,
and	 her	 heart	 beats	 the	way	 it	 should.	 Looked	 at	 for	 any	 length	 of
time,	you	know,	the	picture	could	easily	bring	tears	to	one’s	eyes.	You
want	 me	 to	 return	 it	 some	 time?	 All	 right,	 I	 will.	 But	 meanwhile,
hidden	 in	 my	 confounded	 inside	 pocket,	 it	 will	 take	 a	 brief,
uncomfortable	trip	in	trains	and	through	various	hotel	rooms,	though
the	girl	professes,	so	far	without	explanation,	 to	 feel	uneasy	 in	hotel
rooms.	Yes,	one	 can	 see	 the	 little	watch	chain,	 the	brooch	 is	pretty,
the	hair	waved	and	almost	too	carefully	arranged.	But	 in	spite	of	all
that,	 you	 are	 easily	 recognizable;	 there	 was	 a	 moment	 I	 remember
above	 all	 others,	 when	 you	 sat	 at	 the	 table	 with	 an	 expression	 not
unlike	 the	 one	 in	 the	 picture.	 You	 were	 holding	 one	 of	 the	 Thalia
photographs;	you	 looked	at	me,	who	made	some	stupid	remark,	and
let	your	eyes	wander	around	 the	 table	 in	a	quarter-circle,	until	 they



came	to	rest	on	Otto	Brod,	who	then	gave	the	correct	explanation	of
the	photograph.	The	changing	view	of	your	face,	as	you	slowly	turned
your	head,	left	an	indelible	impression	on	me.	And	now	the	little	girl
for	 whom,	 needless	 to	 say,	 I	 am	 an	 utter	 stranger,	 arrives	 and
confirms	the	truth	of	this	delightful	memory.
I	 have	 thought	 of	 another	 example	 of	 our	 oneness	 of	 mind.
Yesterday	I	asked	you	for	printed	matter,	today	you	promise	to	send
it.	But	these	palpitations,	dearest!	How	can	it	be	true	that	I	am	part	of
your	heart	if	it	palpitates	while	I	want	it	to	be	calm?

Yours,	Franz

[PICTURE	POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Kratzau,	November	26,	1912]

Best	wishes!	A	beastly	journey,	but	a	pleasant	traveling	companion.
F.	Kafka

Kratzau,	District	Court,	November	26,	1912
Dearest,	while	behind	me	the	greedy	opposing	lawyers	are	fighting	for
the	 highest	 bid	 (it	 doesn’t	 matter	 if	 you	 don’t	 know	 what	 this
means74),	 I	 am	quite	 content	 to	 sit	 at	 this	 little	 table	 and	 send	you,
dearest,	my	very	best	love.

Franz

[PICTURE	POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Kratzau,	November	26,	1912]

And	so	my	little	trip	goes	merrily	along.	Best	wishes.
F.	Kafka

November	26,	1912
Felice,	 I	 announce	 that	 this	 is	 one	 of	 those	 letters	 I	 wrote	 about
recently,	that	should	be	torn	up	when	you	reach	the	second	or	third
sentence.	Now	is	the	moment,	Felice,	tear	it	up;	it	is	also	my	moment
for	not	writing	it,	but	alas,	you	will	read	it,	as	surely	as	I	shall	write	it.
I	 have	 just	 come	 back	 from	my	 trip;	 I	went	 first	 to	 the	 office,	 of



course,	and	there	found	your	very	nice	letter	of	Sunday	night.	I	read	it
in	 the	porter’s	 lodge,	and	his	 tiny	wife	 looked	up	at	me	while	 I	was
reading.	Your	letter	is	nice	and	kind	and	true.	(The	only	thing	wrong
is	my	age	on	the	photograph;	I	was	exactly	a	year	old,	as	I	have	just
discovered.)	You	strive	to	let	me	be	part	of	you.	Oh	God,	what	I	want
is	 every	moment	 of	 the	whole	 of	 your	 life.	Nevertheless,	 you	 do	 all
that	 is	 humanly	 possible,	 and	 I	 should	 have	 to	 love	 you	 for	 your
kindness	 alone,	 if	 I	 didn’t	 love	 you	 for	 your	 whole	 precious	 being.
Why	 then	was	 I	not	 satisfied	with	your	 letter?	Why	did	 I	 search	 the
porter’s	table	for	another?	You	did	say	you	would	write	on	Monday,
but	your	Monday	letter	wasn’t	there.	But	haven’t	you	promised	many
times	 to	be	 true	 to	me?	Didn’t	 I	write	only	 the	other	day	 that	 I	will
remain	calm,	even	 if	 there	 is	no	 letter	at	all	at	 the	office?	And	after
all,	there	was	your	Sunday	letter,	and	didn’t	you	go	to	a	rehearsal	on
Monday	evening,	so	that	your	letter	may	have	been	mailed	a	little	too
late?	 At	 any	 rate,	 there	was	 no	 cause	 for	 anxiety	 in	 the	 absence	 of
your	Monday	letter	as	such.	Then	why	was	I	alarmed	when	I	hurried
home,	convinced	that	I	should	find	your	Monday	letter	there,	and	at
the	 same	 time	 in	 hopeless	 despair	 at	 the	 certainty	 of	 my	 coming
disappointment?	Why,	dearest?	Doesn’t	it	seem	like	a	lack	of	love	on
my	 part?	 Though	 if	 at	 this	 moment	 my	 worries	 about	 your	 health
mingle	with	my	 anxiety,	 I	 still	worry	 a	 great	 deal	more	 about	 your
love.	Again	and	again	these	lamentable	expressions	creep	in:	That	you
should	tolerate	me	a	little	longer,	that	I	should	receive	a	few	of	your
thoughts,	 etc.,	 and	when	 there	 is	no	 letter,	 then	a	 telegram	seems	a
very	 slow	 way	 of	 asking	 why.	 So	 far	 I	 have	 only	 once	 been	 as
horrified	as	you	were,	when	you	detected	an	unfamiliar	note	in	one	of
my	letters,	but	there	are	some	little	remarks	that	do	frighten	me.	I	am
frightened	when	I	read	that	your	mother	wants	to	protect	you	against
disappointments,	when	 I	 read	about	your	 friend	 from	Breslau,	about
whom	 I	haven’t	dared	ask	 for	weeks;	 I	 am	 frightened	when	you	 tell
me	that	you	 love	me,	and	 if	you	didn’t	 tell	me,	 I	 should	die.	By	 the
way,	 you	 once	 wrote	 something	 of	 the	 kind;	 I	 couldn’t	 understand
how	 you	 could	 have	 reached	 this	 true	 conclusion.	 But	 I	 was	 not
surprised	 that	you	were	aware	of	 it,	because	your	 feelings	are	never
mistaken,	that	I	know.
Well,	 for	 all	 these	 contradictions	 there	 is	 a	 plain	 and	 simple
explanation;	I	repeat	it,	because	it	is	so	easily	forgotten,	even	by	me:
it	is	the	state	of	my	health,	no	more	and	no	less.	I	can’t	tell	you	more
about	 it,	 but	 that	 is	 what	 robs	 me	 of	 my	 confidence	 vis-à-vis	 you,



which	upsets	me,	and	eventually	drags	you	down.	That	above	all,	and
not	because	I	love	you,	is	why	I	need	your	letters	and	all	but	devour
them;	that	is	why	I	am	unable	to	believe	all	the	nice	things	you	say;
that	is	why	I	cringe	before	you	with	these	sad	requests—for	that	and
no	 other	 reason.	 And	 faced	 with	 that,	 of	 course,	 even	 the	 kindest
person’s	power	is	bound	to	fail.	I	feel	I	shall	never	have	the	strength
to	do	without	you,	but	what	I	considered	a	virtue	in	others,	turns	out
to	be	my	greatest	vice.——
It	was	 a	 beastly	 journey,	 dearest.	 The	 lost	 evening	made	me	 very
melancholy.	Indeed,	there	wasn’t	a	single	moment	on	the	trip	when	I
didn’t	feel	at	least	a	tiny	bit	unhappy.	Everything	was	damp,	even	up
in	the	mountains,	though	some	snow	fell	during	the	night;	the	heating
in	my	hotel	room	couldn’t	be	turned	off,	and	I	slept	all	night	with	the
window	wide	open,	the	snow	blowing	into	my	face	while	I	slept.	From
the	 beginning	 of	 the	 trip	 I	 sat	 opposite	 a	 repulsive	woman	 and	 felt
restless	because	 I	had	to	keep	curbing	my	desire	 to	ram	my	fist	 into
her	 mouth	 every	 time	 she	 yawned.	 During	 the	 whole	 trip	 your
photograph	was	looked	at	now	and	then	for	comfort,	and	for	comfort
your	 photograph	 spent	 the	 night	 on	 a	 chair	 beside	 my	 bed.	 One
shouldn’t	ever	go	away;	better	to	be	insubordinate	at	the	office,	if	at
home	 there	 is	 work	 to	 be	 done	 that	 requires	 all	 one’s	 energy.	 This
everlasting	fear	(it	hasn’t	left	me	yet)	that	the	trip	may	have	harmed
my	story,	that	I	shan’t	be	able	to	write	any	more,	etc.	And	to	have	to
face	this	miserable	weather	with	such	thoughts	in	one’s	head,	to	have
to	plough	through	the	mud,	get	stuck	in	the	mud,	get	up	at	5	o’clock!
To	take	my	revenge	on	Kratzau,	I	went	to	the	stationer	and	bought	the
only	 decent	 book	 Kratzau	 possessed	 at	 that	 moment.	 A	 story	 by
Balzac.	 By	 the	 way,	 the	 introduction	 says	 that	 Balzac	 followed	 for
years	a	certain	routine	which	seems	very	sensible	to	me.	He	went	to
bed	at	6	 P.M.,	 got	 up	 at	midnight,	 and	worked	 for	 the	 remaining	 18
hours.	But	he	was	wrong	to	drink	such	enormous	quantities	of	coffee,
thereby	damaging	his	 heart.—But	 on	 that	 sort	 of	 journey	nothing	 is
really	any	good.	I	didn’t	like	Balzac’s	story.	In	the	Railroad	News	I	read
an	 absurd	 remark	 attributed	 to	 Goethe,	 that	 Prague	 is	 “the	 most
precious	 stone	 in	 the	 world’s	 mural	 crown.”	 The	 best	 part	 of	 the
journey	 was	 getting	 out	 at	 Prague;	 altogether	 my	 state	 of	 mind
improved	 the	nearer	we	got	 to	Prague.	As	 I	was	about	 to	get	out,	 a
small	 child	 tugged	 at	 my	 collar;	 I	 turned	 around	 and	 saw	 a	 young
woman	with	a	child	in	her	arms.	Again	she	reminded	me	very	much



of	 you,	 at	 least	 at	 first	 glance,	 and	 again	 it	 wasn’t	 her	 face	 or	 any
particular	 feature,	 but	 only	 the	 general	 impression,	 and	 therefore
especially	undeniable.	It	may	be	that	your	image	is	constantly	before
my	eyes.	No	one	has	ever	helped	this	young	woman	out	of	a	carriage
with	as	much	care	as	I	did	then.	Anyway,	she	needed	help,	for	she	was
carrying	the	child	in	her	arms	and	couldn’t	see	the	steps.
Of	course	you	must	tell	me	about	that	trip	you	made,	and	as	much
as	possible!	 I	 thought	 it	 strange	enough	at	 the	 time	 that	one	 should
choose	 that	 kind	of	 trip	 for	 a	holiday;	 you	were	not	 in	 the	 country,
nor	did	you	visit	any	particularly	interesting	foreign	cities.	If	relatives
expect	one	to	visit	them,	they	should	first	go	to	the	Riviera,	and	then
invite	 one.	 Incidentally,	 I	 followed	 you	 to	 some	 extent	 on	 that
journey,	though	unobtrusively.	I	too	have	an	old	friend	in	Breslau	(not
the	pious	one	I	told	you	about,	he	lives	in	the	country,	is	a	surveyor,
and	for	his	address	I	should	have	to	look	in	the	Bible	he	gave	me	as	a
souvenir).	 This	 friendship,	 because	 I	 am	 a	 lazy	 correspondent,
continues	on	the	whole	in	silence.	But	when	I	assumed	you	might	be
in	Breslau,	 I	wrote	 to	him	out	of	 the	blue,	after	an	 interval	of	many
months,	 in	 order	 to	 be	 part	 of—at	 least	 by	 letter—the	 Breslau	 you
happened	 to	be	 in.75	 I	 didn’t	make	 that	 quite	 clear	 to	myself	 at	 the
time,	but	it	was	exactly	that;	there	was	no	strong	reason	for	the	letter,
or	rather	there	was	none	at	all.
By	the	way,	do	you	keep	a	diary?	Have	you	ever	kept	one?	And	that
reminds	 me:	 Why	 don’t	 you	 ever	 tell	 me	 anything	 about	 your	 girl
friend,	the	one	you	said	was	such	an	intimate	friend?
Farewell,	 dearest.	 The	 threat	 that	 hangs	 over	 us	 and	 which	 I
mentioned	earlier	on,	should	be	left	undisturbed	until	such	time	as	we
can	exchange	the	first	real	words,	not	written	ones.	Don’t	you	agree?
Please	don’t	 look	upon	 this	 letter	 as	 a	 relapse,	we	 are	 in	 the	new
age	though	it	has	been	dimmed	by	the	disruption	of	my	writing.

Your	hand,	Felice!	Franz

Am	I	right	that	both	our	mothers	have	started	worrying	about	us
at	 the	 same	 time?	 Does	 your	 mother	 say	 nice	 or	 merely
indifferent	 things	 about	me?	 And	why	 did	 she	 think	 of	me	 the
moment	 you	 talked	 about	 your	 friend	 from	 Breslau?	 Please
answer	all	my	questions!



On	a	separate	page,	enclosed:
I	must	not	forget	the	outcome	of	the	real	purpose	of	my	journey,	for	it
too	shows	the	hostile	character	of	the	trip.	I	was	successful,	or	rather
my	 Institute	 was	 successful.	 Whereas	 I	 thought	 I	 should	 get	 300
kronen,	 I	 got	 4500,	 that	 is,	 about	 4000	 kronen	 extra.	 “You	 should
have	resisted	the	success,”	I	said	to	myself	on	the	return	journey	while
watching	the	rooks	above	snow-covered	fields.

November	26,	1912
Now,	 late	 at	 night,	 I	 have	 had	 a	 consoling	 thought:	 your	 Monday
letter	may	have	arrived	after	all,	but	someone	failed	to	give	it	to	the
porter.	 In	that	case	I	should	get	 it	 first	 thing	tomorrow,	and	perhaps
another	at	10!	The	office	gets	nastier	 in	contrast	 to	your	 letters,	but
because	they	come	to	the	office,	it	also	gets	nicer.

November	27,	1912
Dearest,	 it	was	 11:15	 A.M.,	 I	 had	 just	 escaped	 from	work	 for	 a	 little
while,	found	myself	in	my	usual	state	of	agitation,	and	started	a	letter,
the	first	line	of	which	I	enclose.	Then	fortunately	your	postcard	with
the	picture	arrived.	 (Nor	did	your	Monday	 letter	arrive	until	 today.)
Yes,	 dearest,	 that’s	 right,	 that’s	 what	 I	 want,	 at	 least	 the	 promised
news,	 but	 that	 without	 fail—no	 matter	 how	 trivial.	 For	 example,	 I
don’t	want	you	to	write	to	me	at	night,	 I	won’t	give	 in	about	that;	 I
even	 think	 that	 last	 night	 my	 mediocre	 writing	 was	 due	 to	 your
writing	to	me	at	the	same	time	of	night	(secretly	I	say	to	myself:	pray
God	that	you	should	have	done	it),	but	once	a	night	letter	is	written,
then	I	want	to	get	it.	On	your	postcard	you	say	you	wrote	on	Monday
night.	Well,	 I	haven’t	had	 that	 letter.	What	 shall	 I	do?	When	 I	need
every	 line	you	write!	According	 to	 that	postcard	 I	may	be	getting	2
letters	 tomorrow,	 but	 I	 am	 sure	 to	 get	 only	 one,	 perhaps	 none.	My
hands	feel	as	though	they	will	slide	off	the	table	from	helplessness	and
longing	for	you.
I	am	sure	all	my	 letters	also	get	 lost—the	one	 from	Kratzau,	 from
Reichenberg,	 this	 morning’s	 letter,	 the	 ordinary,	 the	 registered,	 the
express	 letters,	all	of	 them.	For	 instance,	you	say	I	wrote	only	a	few
lines	 on	 Sunday	 night,	 whereas	 I	 sent	 you	 at	 least	 8	 pages	 and	 an
infinite	 sigh.	Dearest,	 if	 our	mail	doesn’t	bring	us	 together	 soon,	we
shall	never	get	together.



The	new	photograph	makes	me	feel	strange.	I	feel	closer	to	the	little
girl,	could	say	anything	to	her,	but	for	the	young	lady	I	feel	too	much
respect.	 I	 keep	 thinking:	 though	 it	 is	 Felice,	 it	 is	 also	 a	 grown-up
young	lady,	and	what’s	more,	very	much	of	a	young	lady.	She	is	gay,
not	that	the	little	girl	was	sad,	just	terribly	serious;	she	has	a	full	face
(due	perhaps	to	the	effect	of	probable	evening	light),	the	little	girl	was
pale.	If	I	had	to	choose	between	them	in	real	life,	I	wouldn’t	rush	up
to	 the	 little	 girl	 without	 hesitating—no,	 I	 wouldn’t	 do	 that,	 but	 I
would	 nevertheless	 advance,	 even	 though	 very	 slowly,	 toward	 the
little	girl,	while	all	the	time	turning	to	glance	at	the	young	lady,	never
letting	her	out	of	my	sight.	Nicest	of	course	would	be	if	the	little	girl
then	took	me	up	to	the	young	lady,	and	commended	me	to	her.
By	the	way,	what	was	this	photograph	of	which	you	send	only	part?
Why	don’t	 I	 get	 all	 of	 it?	Because	 it’s	 a	 poor	picture?	 So	 you	 really
don’t	 think	 I	 am	 capable	 of	 seeing	 the	 best	 in	 you,	 even	 in	 a	 poor
picture?	Judging	by	the	piece	of	white	frill	around	your	neck,	which
shows	in	the	picture	and	could	belong	to	a	blouse,	I	almost	suspect	it
is	a	photograph	of	you	dressed	as	Pierrot;	if	so,	it	would	be	too	bad	of
you	 to	 withhold	 the	 picture,	 and	 anyway	 it’s	 wrong	 to	 cut
photographs,	 the	 more	 so	 if	 they	 are	 to	 be	 sent	 to	 someone	 who
yearns	for	the	sight	of	you	as	much	as	I	do.
My	idea	of	your	company	was	more	or	less	right,	but	I	should	never
have	 thought	 that	 the	 confounded	 din	 of	 1500	 gramophones	would
emanate	from	it	every	day.	How	many	people’s	nerves	are	you	guilty
of	 shattering,	 dearest	 lady?	 Have	 you	 thought	 of	 that?	 There	 were
times	when	I	was	obsessed	with	the	idea	that	a	gramophone	will	and
must	be	installed	somewhere	near	our	apartment,	and	that	would	be
my	ruin.	 It	didn’t	happen;	your	Prague	branch	(whose	address	 I	 still
don’t	 know,	 and	whose	manager	 once	 took	you	 to	Hradčany	Castle,
which	I	won’t	easily	forgive)	doesn’t	seem	to	be	working	hard	enough;
you	 should	 come	and	give	 them	a	 thorough	 inspection	 lasting	days,
weeks,	 a	 lifetime.	 Even	 so,	 1500	 gramophones!	 And	 surely,	 before
being	sent	off,	they	must	have	shrieked	at	least	once.	Poor	Felice!	Are
the	 walls	 thick	 enough	 to	 protect	 you	 from	 the	 first	 1500	 shrieks?
That’s	why	you	 take	aspirin.	As	 for	me,	 I	don’t	 even	have	 to	hear	a
gramophone;	their	very	existence	I	consider	a	threat.	I	liked	them	only
in	Paris;	Pathé	have	a	showroom	there	on	one	of	the	boulevards,	with
Pathephones,	 where	 for	 a	 small	 coin	 one	 can	 listen	 to	 a	 prodigious
program	(chosen	from	a	fat	catalogue).	You	should	do	this	in	Berlin,	if
it	 isn’t	 done	 already.	 Do	 you	 also	 sell	 records?	 I	 shall	 order	 1000



records	with	your	voice,	and	all	you	need	say	is	that	you	grant	me	as
many	kisses	as	I	need	to	forget	all	sorrow.

Yours.	Franz

The	enclosed	first	sentence:
[CZECH	LETTERHEAD	OF	THE	WORKERS’	ACCIDENT	 INSURANCE	 INSTITUTE:	Úrazová	pojištovna
dělnická]

Dearest,	when	you	are	too	busy	to	write	at	length,	I	beg	you	to	adopt
the	habit	of	sending	me	a	postcard,	telling	me	in	3	words	that	you	are
well.

November	27,	1912
Dearest,	why	does	one	end	letters	with	kisses	when	letters	themselves
are	 so	 unimportant	 that,	 confronted	 by	 your	 longed-for	 and	 yet
unimaginable	 presence,	 paper	 and	pen	would	 turn	 into	 nothingness,
which,	 in	 fact,	 they	 already	 are.	 Really,	 Felice,	 when	 I	 sit	 here	 all
alone	at	night	after	writing	rather	badly	as	I	have	these	past	two	days
(the	 story	 progresses	 in	 a	 dull,	 placid	 way,	 illuminated	 only	 by
moments	of	the	essential	clarity);	when	in	this	far	from	perfect	state	of
mind	I	try	to	imagine	our	next	meeting,	I	sometimes	fear	that	seeing
you	would	be	unbearable	to	me,	whether	in	the	street,	 the	office,	or
your	home;	so	unbearable	that	no	one,	not	even	you,	should	witness
it,	and	that	I	could	bear	it	only	when	I	am	so	utterly	confused	and	in
such	 a	 haze	 that	 I	 should	 be	 unworthy	 to	 appear	 before	 you.
Fortunately,	however,	you	are	not	a	statue,	but	alive,	and	very	much
alive,	so	perhaps	all	will	be	well	once	you	have	offered	me	your	hand,
and	my	face	might	get	to	look	human	again	before	long.
You	 ask	 about	 my	 Christmas	 vacation.	 Unfortunately	 I	 haven’t	 a
calendar	by	me.	Of	course	I	only	get	the	two	holidays	off,	but	since	3
vacation	days	are	still	due	to	me	before	the	end	of	the	year	(a	precious
possession,	the	thought	of	using	it	has	kept	me	going	for	months)	and
the	holidays,	I	understand,	are	so	placed	that	by	fitting	in	2	of	my	3
days,	plus	the	Sunday,	would	give	me	5	or	even	6	free	days,	so	if	I	use
those	two	days	I	should	have	quite	a	reasonable	Christmas	vacation.
Actually	I	was	quite	determined	to	use	these	days	solely	for	my	novel,
perhaps	 even	 to	 finish	 it.	 And	 now	 that	 the	 novel	 has	 not	 been



touched	for	more	than	a	week,	and	the	new	story,	though	nearing	its
end,	has	been	 trying	 for	 the	past	2	days	 to	make	me	believe	 I	have
been	all	wrong,	I	should	be	more	than	ever	determined	to	stick	to	my
resolution.	I	shall	lose	one	day	of	the	Christmas	vacation	anyway,	on
account	of	my	sister’s	wedding;	that	will	be	the	22nd.	Besides,	I	can’t
remember	ever	having	traveled	at	Christmas;	to	go	rolling	off	one	day,
rolling	back	 the	next:	 the	 futility	of	 such	an	undertaking	has	always
overwhelmed	me.	Well,	dearest,	what	about	your	Christmas	vacation?
Will	you	stay	in	Berlin	in	spite	of	your	great	need	for	relaxation?	You
wanted	 to	 go	 up	 into	 the	mountains.	Where?	 Any	 place	where	 you
would	be	accessible	to	me?	You	see,	I	was	determined	not	to	show	my
face	 until	 I	 had	 finished	 the	 novel,	 but	 I	 ask	 myself,	 though	 only
tonight,	 would	 I	 be	 more	 worthy	 or	 at	 least	 less	 unworthy	 of	 you,
dearest,	after	finishing	it	than	before?	And	is	it	not	more	important	to
allow	my	poor	eyes	to	feast	on	you	than	to	give	free	rein	to	my	mania
for	writing	for	6	consecutive	days	and	nights?	You	say.	For	myself,	I
answer	with	a	big	“Yes.”

Franz

November	28,	1912
Dearest	 Felice,	 we	 are	 being	made	 fools	 of	 by	 the	mail.	 I	 got	 your
Tuesday	letter	yesterday,	and	complained	about	Monday	night’s	letter
being	lost,	and	here	it	is	today,	Thursday	morning.	Somewhere	within
this	 rigid	 organization	 of	 postal	 services,	 there	 seems	 to	 be	 some
diabolical	official	who	is	playing	about	with	our	letters,	 letting	them
go	according	to	his	whim—if	only	he	really	would	 let	 them	all	go!	 I
also	 got	 Tuesday	 night’s	 letter,	 nocturnal	 letters	 without	 exception,
thus	 in	 fact	 an	 (immensely	 gratifying)	 mockery	 of	 my	 plea	 not	 to
write	at	night.	Don’t	do	 it	again,	please,	Felice;	 though	 it	makes	me
happy,	don’t	do	it,	in	any	case	not	until	your	nerves	are	calmer.	And
tell	 me	 about	 your	 weeping.	 Why	 does	 it	 come	 over	 you?	 For	 no
reason?	 You	 are	 just	 sitting	 at	 your	 table,	 and	 suddenly	 you	 are	 in
tears?	 Yes,	 dearest,	 but	 then	 you	 should	 be	 in	 bed,	 and	 not	 at
rehearsals.	 I	 am	 especially	 frightened	 of	 tears.	 I	 cannot	 cry.	 To	me
other	people’s	tears	are	a	strange,	incomprehensible	phenomenon.	In
the	course	of	many	years	I	have	cried	only	once,	that	was	two	or	three
months	ago;	but	then	I	was	literally	shaking	in	my	armchair,	twice	in
quick	succession;	I	was	afraid	my	uncontrollable	sobs	would	wake	my



parents	next	door;	 it	happened	at	night	and	was	brought	about	by	a
particular	 passage	 in	 my	 novel.	 But	 your	 weeping,	 dearest,	 is
worrying,	or	do	you	cry	so	very	easily?	Have	you	always?	Is	it	partly
my	fault?	But	I’m	sure	it	is.	Tell	me,	has	anyone	who	has	so	much	to
thank	you	 for	ever	 tormented	you	 for	no	 reason	 (no	 reason	on	your
side)	as	I	have?	You	don’t	have	to	tell	me.	I	know.	But	I	didn’t	do	it
wantonly,	that	surely	you	know,	or	feel,	Felice.	But	I	am	haunted	by
your	 tears.	 They	 can’t	 be	 due	 only	 to	 general	 anxiety;	 you	 are	 not
spoiled;	there	must	be	a	particular,	clearly	explicable	reason	for	them.
Name	it,	I	beg	you,	for	you	may	not	know	that	a	word	from	you	has
immense	power	over	me;	take	advantage	of	it	to	the	full,	if	the	anxiety
and	the	tears	should	have	any	connection	with	me.	You	must	make	it
absolutely	 plain	 in	 your	 reply	 to	 this	 letter.	 Perhaps	 really	 the	 only
reason	 is	 that	we	write	 to	 each	 other	 too	 often.	 I	 am	 enclosing	 the
letter	 I	 began	on	 that	 telegram-Sunday,	but	didn’t	dare	 finish	at	 the
time	 because	 of	my	misery	when	 the	 second	mail	 brought	 nothing.
Read	it	like	an	ancient	document.	I	no	longer	agree	with	every	word	I
wrote	then,	but	your	tears	reminded	me	of	it.
I	am	writing	in	great	haste,	there	is	a	lot	more	I	could	say	to	you,
but	 time	 is	 not	 my	 own	 this	 afternoon,	 and	 probably	 won’t	 be	 for
several	more	to	come.	May	I	kiss	your	beautiful	moist	eyes?

Franz

The	enclosed	unfinished	letter	of	November	18,	1912:
Dearest,	 today	 my	 office	 work	 starts	 with	 this	 letter,	 but	 at	 the
moment	can	there	really	be	anything	more	important	for	either	of	us
than	what	follows?	Please	answer	at	once,	and	in	your	wisdom	I	hope
you	will	agree	with	me,	for	if	you	don’t	I	fear	I	could	not	resist	your
opinion.	 Just	 keep	 in	mind,	 you	 are	 strong	 enough	 to	 bear	 things	 I
could	not	possibly	bear,	and	when	things	become	unbearable	for	me	I
inevitably	pull	you	down	to	my	level	with	the	irresistible	force	of	my
weakness;	you	saw	it	happen	last	week.	So	listen,	it	is	due	to	nothing
but	 fear	 and	 apprehension	 that	 makes	 me	 take	 these	 precautions:
Writing	 two	 letters	 a	 day,	 as	 I	 have	 been	 doing	 lately,	 is	 sweet
madness,	nothing	else.	 (The	 first	mail	has	 just	arrived,	and	no	 letter
from	you.	For	heaven’s	sake,	could	you	still	be	ill?)	It	can’t	go	on	like
this.	We	are	lashing	each	other	with	all	these	letters.	They	can’t	create
a	 presence,	 only	 a	 mixture	 of	 presence	 and	 distance	 that	 becomes
unbearable.	Dearest,	we	must	not	drive	each	other	 into	 the	state	we



have	been	in	lately;	that	mustn’t	happen,	come	what	may,	if	only	for
your	 sake.	Nevertheless,	when	writing	 this	 kind	 of	 letter	 I	 foresee	 a
certain	 point	 in	 one	 of	 your	 future	 letters,	 in	which	 again	 you	will
reproach	me	mildly	 and	 gently	 for	 one	 of	 my	 letters,	 and	 this	 will
throw	me	into	a	state	of	worry	and	despair.	Although	things	between
us	can’t	ever	again	be	as	bad	as	they	were	the	other	day,	they	can	still
be	bad	 enough.	 Let	us	 spare	 each	other	 for	 better	 days,	 should	God
ever	 grant	 them	 to	 us,	which	 at	 the	moment	 of	 course	 I	 can’t	 even
imagine.	Let	love	unite	us,	not	despair.	And	that	is	why	I	beg	you,	let
us	 put	 an	 end	 to	 this	 flood	 of	 letters	 that	 produces	 nothing	 but
delusion,	which	makes	one	dizzy.	To	me	they	are	indispensable,	yet	I
beg	 you	 nevertheless.	 If	 you	 agree,	 I	 shall	 get	 used	 to	 writing	 less
often,	but	certainly	not	otherwise,	for	it’s	a	poison	that	lodges	in	the
pit	of	one’s	stomach.	Suggest	how	we	should	do	it;	I	will	listen	to	you,
not	to	myself.	Remember:	to	write	when	one	has	the	urge	to	do	so	is
not	a	proper	solution;	it	is	merely	a	further	lashing,	for	the	craving	to
write,	and	to	read	your	letters,	is	with	me	every	God-given	moment	of
my	life.	Meanwhile	I	believe	the	restraint

The	following	remarks	are	written	on	the	same	page:
November	28,	1912

I	 don’t	 know	 how	 old	 I	was	 in	 this	 one.	 At	 that	 time	 I	 think	 I	 still
belonged	completely	 to	myself,	 and	 it	 seems	 to	have	 suited	me	very
well.	 As	 the	 eldest,	 I	 was	 constantly	 being	 photographed	 and	 there
exists	a	long	succession	of	transformations.	From	now	on	it	gets	worse
in	every	picture,	but	you’ll	 see.	 In	 the	very	next	one	 I	appear	as	my
parents’	ape.

I	 have	 now	 got	 ready	 for	 you	 a	 copy	 of	Max’s	 Intensity	 of	 Feeling.76
Bound	beautifully	 in	green	 leather,	although	not	spotlessly	clean.	 (Is
there	such	a	thing	as	spotlessly	clean	leather?)	I	could	send	it	now	(it’s
just	out,	and	is	Max’s	latest	book),	but	I	want	to	take	it	along	to	the
Brods’	first,	to	get	Max	to	write	something	nice	in	it	for	you.	Then	I’ll
send	it	at	once.

So	 you’ve	 never	 read	 anything	 by	 Baum?	 I	 really	will	 have	 to	 send
you	something	soon.	He	has	been	totally	blind	from	the	age	of	7;	he	is
now	roughly	my	age,	married,	with	a	splendid	little	boy.	As	a	matter
of	fact	Baum	gave	a	lecture	in	Berlin	not	so	very	long	ago,	and	there



was	a	lot	about	him	in	the	Berlin	papers.
November	28,	1912

Dog-tired,	dearest,	I	still	venture	to	write	a	few	lines,	because	I	must.
The	afternoon	was	sacrificed	to	the	office;	I	didn’t	sleep,	and	therefore
can’t	go	on	writing,	but	now,	 in	 its	usual	 insidious	way,	 the	urge	 to
write	 is	 overpowering.	 The	 devil	 take	 it!	Will	 things	 ever	 improve?
Felice,	open	your	eyes	and	let	me	look	into	them;	if	my	present	is	in
them,	why	shouldn’t	I	find	my	future	in	them	too?
By	 the	 way,	 I	 have	 been	 talking	 to	 several	 people	 today,	 in
particular	to	a	painter	from	Berlin,77	and	I	have	noticed	that	my	self-
imposed	 isolation	 may	 perhaps	 have	 made	 me	 imperceptibly
(imperceptible	 to	me,	 not	 to	 you,	 dearest)	 quite	 unpalatable.	When
among	strangers,	the	first	satisfactory	result,	though	only	momentarily
satisfactory,	 is	 that	 one	 loses	 the	 greater	 part	 of	 one’s	 sense	 of
responsibility,	 with	 which,	 in	 the	 permanently	 strained	 relationship
with	oneself,	one	has	to	be	equipped	to	the	very	tips	of	one’s	fingers.
One	 begins	 to	 hope	 the	 burdens	 imposed	upon	 one	may	 secretly	 be
common	to	all,	and	therefore	 their	weight	shared	by	all.	A	mistaken
but	 pleasant	 thought!	 There	 is	 sympathy	 everywhere,	 from	 all	 sides
people	hasten	to	help,	and	even	the	reluctant	and	undecided	person	is
propelled	 toward	his	 salvation	with	great	 cheerfulness	put	on	by	all
for	the	occasion.	Once	I	enjoy	a	person,	that	joy	knows	no	bounds.	I
can	never	have	enough	physical	contact	with	that	person;	this	sounds
indecent,	but	I	like	walking	arm	in	arm	with	him,	then	I	withdraw	my
arm,	 and	 the	moment	 I	 feel	 like	 it,	 put	 it	 back	 again;	 all	 the	 time	 I
want	to	get	him	to	talk,	not	 in	order	to	hear	what	he	wishes	to	say,
rather	to	hear	what	I	want	to	hear.	This	painter	for	example	(his	self-
portrait	 is	enclosed)	has	a	great	urge	to	hold	forth	about	theories	on
art,	no	doubt	subjectively	true,	but	all	the	same	as	feeble	and	easy	to
snuff	 out	 as	 a	 candle.	On	 the	 other	 hand,	 I	 only	wanted	 (and	 that’s
why	it	was	doubly	important	to	take	the	poor	painter’s	arm	and	drag
him	this	way	and	that)	to	hear	that	he	has	been	married	for	a	year,	is
happy,	 works	 all	 day,	 lives	 in	 2	 rooms	 in	 a	 house	 in	 a.	 garden	 at
Wilmersdorf,	and	other	such	things	which	arouse	envy	and	courage.

Goodnight.	Franz

[CZECH	LETTERHEAD	OF	THE	WORKERS’	ACCIDENT	INSURANCE	INSTITUTE]
November	29,	1912



Today,	dearest,	I	received	only	Wednesday	night’s	letter,	so	have	news
of	 you	 only	 up	 to	 the	 moment	 you	 mailed	 the	 letter	 on	 Thursday
morning.	And	indeed	a	 lot	of	 time	has	gone	by	since	then.	But	 I	am
not	at	all	anxious,	because	you	don’t	want	me	 to	be,	but	 in	 fact	my
composure	 lasts	 only	 as	 long	 as	 you	maintain	 your	 composure.	 You
must	be	in	an	awful	muddle	just	now	with	those	rehearsals;	I	shall	be
very	glad	for	your	sake	when	it’s	all	over.	Will	you	have	a	part?	What
will	it	be?	Incidentally,	you’ve	been	neglecting	me,	dearest:	had	I	ever
been	“Humor,”	I	should	have	sent	you	my	part	long	ago.	If	your	script
were	 here,	 I	 should	 learn	 it	 by	 heart	 in	 spite	 of	 my	 bad	 memory
(because	 forces	 other	 than	 those	 of	 memory	 would	 come	 to	 my
assistance),	and	 in	my	room	at	night	 I	 should	declaim	 it	boldly.	But
those	 dreams	 of	 which	 I	 am	 the	 cause,	 dearest;	 they	 are	 sinister,
unhappy,	and	make	me	wonder.	Am	I	fated	to	torment	you	not	only
when	you	are	awake,	but	even	in	your	sleep?
That	first	photograph	of	yours	is	very	dear	to	me,	for	the	little	girl
no	 longer	exists,	and	so	 the	photograph	 is	all	 there	 is.	But	 the	other
picture	only	portrays	your	dear	presence,	and	my	yearning	carries	my
glance	 beyond	 the	 disquieting	 little	 picture.	Geistesgenie	 [intellectual
genius]	is	like	a	word	in	a	dream,	senseless,	yet	profoundly	true;	it	did
not	surprise	me	at	all	to	find	the	dream-story	on	the	next	page.	By	the
way,	why	is	the	earlier	photograph	full	of	holes?
But	now	I	must	stop,	dearest,	and	will	mail	this	half-finished	letter,
for	 I	 don’t	 know	whether	 I	 shall	 be	 able	 to	 write	 again	 before	 late
tonight.
Again	we	have	been	of	one	mind.	In	your	last	letter	you	remind	me
of	 my	 photograph;	 I	 got	 that	 letter	 probably	 the	 very	 moment	 you
received	mine,	written	yesterday,	with	 the	picture	 in	 it.	But	 there	 is
also	 something	 unfulfilled.	 Both	 letters	 say	we	want	 to	meet,	 but	 it
does	not	happen.
Fräulein	Brühl’s	latest	little	poem	is	again	a	splendid	achievement,
far	better	than	the	poem	by	the	gentleman,	which	is	quite	creditable
too.	What	did	she	do	to	deserve	a	scolding?	At	this	point	do	look	at
the	girl	(I	assume	she	is	sitting	in	your	room)	and	salute	her	silently
on	my	behalf.
Is	it	a	mere	coincidence	that	your	firm	started	making	Parlographs
at	 about	 the	 time	 you	 joined	 them,	 or	 have	 you	 been	 in	 that
department	 ever	 since	 it	 started?	Do	 I	 ask	 too	many	questions?	You
must	be	buried	by	a	mountain	of	questions	by	now.	No	need	to	hurry
over	 your	 replies.	 I	 shall	 never	 stop	 asking.	Adieu	 for	 a	 little	while.



Especially	beautiful	handwriting	today,	isn’t	it?
Yours,	Franz

November	30,	1912
[Night	of	November	29	to	30,	1912]

Tired,	 you	 are	 sure	 to	 be	 tired,	 my	 Felice,	 when	 you	 pick	 up	 this
letter,	and	I	must	make	an	effort	to	write	clearly	to	spare	your	sleepy
eyes.	Wouldn’t	you	rather	leave	the	letter	unread	for	the	moment,	lie
back,	and	go	on	sleeping	for	a	few	more	hours	after	this	week	of	noise
and	rush?	The	letter	won’t	fly	away,	but	will	be	quite	happy	to	wait
on	your	bedcover	until	you	wake	up.
I	can’t	tell	you	exactly	what	time	it	is	while	I	am	writing	this	letter,
because	my	watch	is	on	a	chair	not	far	away	and	I	don’t	dare	get	up
and	look;	it	must	be	nearly	morning.	But	I	didn’t	get	to	my	desk	until
after	 midnight.	 In	 the	 spring	 and	 summer—I	 don’t	 yet	 know	 from
experience,	 for	my	nightly	vigils	are	of	 recent	date—one	will	not	be
able	 to	 stay	 awake	 undisturbed	 through	 three	 hours,	 for	 dawn	 will
come	 on	 and	 drive	 one	 to	 bed,	 but	 now	 in	 these	 long,	 unchanging
nights	the	world	forgets	about	one,	even	if	one	doesn’t	forget	about	it.
My	work	moreover	has	been	so	bad	that	I	don’t	deserve	any	sleep,
and	should	be	condemned	to	spend	the	rest	of	the	night	looking	out	of
the	window.	Can	you	understand	this,	dearest:	to	write	badly,	yet	feel
compelled	 to	write,	 or	 abandon	 oneself	 to	 total	 despair!	 To	 have	 to
atone	for	the	joys	of	good	writing	in	this	terrible	way!	In	fact,	not	to
be	really	unhappy,	not	 to	be	pierced	by	a	fresh	stab	of	unhappiness,
but	 to	 see	 the	 pages	 being	 covered	 endlessly	with	 things	 one	 hates,
that	fill	one	with	loathing,	or	at	any	rate	with	dull	indifference,	that
nevertheless	 have	 to	 be	 written	 down	 in	 order	 that	 one	 shall	 live.
Disgusting!	If	only	I	could	destroy	the	pages	I	have	written	in	the	last
4	days,	as	though	they	had	never	been.
But	what	sort	of	a	good-morning	is	this?	Is	this	the	way	to	welcome
one’s	 beloved	 on	 a	 beautiful	 Sunday	morning?	Well,	 one	 welcomes
her	the	way	one	can,	you	wouldn’t	want	it	otherwise.	If	sleep	has	not
been	completely	driven	out	by	my	complaints	and	you	can	find	some
more,	then	I’m	satisfied.	And,	as	my	farewell,	I	add	that	everything	is
definitely,	quite	definitely	going	to	be	better,	and	you	need	not	worry.
Surely	 I	 can’t	 be	 utterly	 thrown	 out	 of	 my	 writing	 after	 having
thought	more	than	once	that	 I	was	sitting	 in	 its	center,	settled	 in	 its



comforting	warmth.
But	 now	 not	 another	 word,	 only	 kisses,	 and	many	 of	 them	 for	 a
thousand	 reasons—because	 it’s	 Sunday,	 because	 the	 festivities	 are
over,	 because	 the	weather	 is	 fine,	 or	maybe	 because	 the	weather	 is
bad,	 because	 I	 write	 badly,	 and	 because	 I	 hope	 my	 writing	 will
improve,	 and	 because	 I	 know	 so	 little	 about	 you	 and	 kisses	 are	 the
only	means	 of	 discovering	 something	 that	 counts,	 and	because	 after
all	you	are	very	sleepy	and	can’t	offer	any	resistance.
Goodnight!	Have	a	pleasant	Sunday!

Yours,	Franz

[CZECH	LETTERHEAD	OF	THE	WORKERS’	ACCIDENT	INSURANCE	INSTITUTE]
November	30,	1912

Dearest,	wherever	I	am	you	must	be	in	my	thoughts,	which	is	why	I
am	writing	to	you	at	my	chief’s	desk,	while	deputizing	for	him.	Your
long	 letter	 and	 the	 two	 postcards	 made	 me	 so	 happy	 today!
Incidentally,	 in	 the	usual	crazy	 fashion,	Friday	night’s	 letter,	written
later,	 arrived	before	 the	2	postcards.	 I	w	 (a	 telephone	 call	 from	my
director	has	just	called	me	back	to	my	business;	he	hardly	succeeded.)
As	 I	 was	 saying,	 I	 was	 in	 the	 tobacconist’s	 buying	 a	 stamp	 for	 the
letter	you	will	get	on	Sunday,	the	mail	permitting	(dearest,	I	tell	you,
letters	do	get,	do	get	lost,	or	I	am	suffering	from	persecution	mania);
our	mailman	happened	to	be	standing	next	to	me,	with	your	letter	on
top	of	the	bundle;	I	grabbed	it	with	such	force	that	I	nearly	upset	the
whole	lot.
What	 tremendous	 preparations	 you	 people	 are	 making!	 I	 shall
expect	 to	 get	 the	 commemorative	 program	 at	 once.	What	 kind	 of	 a
debate	 was	 that	 about	 the	 Russian	 Ballet?	 Is	 it	 part	 of	 the	 play?78
Please	 don’t	worry	 about	me,	 I	 am	more	 or	 less	 all	 right,	 at	 least	 I
don’t	cry,	don’t	throw	myself	across	the	sofa,	and	worry	only	because
you	do.	You	know,	there	are	wonderful	sanatoria	in	this	wide	world.	I
shall	 have	 to	 tell	 you	 about	 them	 shortly.	 Please	 explain	 why	 your
fellow	 actors	 take	 pity	 on	 you	 and	make	 allowances	 on	 account	 of
your	nerves;	surely	you	are	not	always	in	a	state	of	nerves;	everyone
is	bound	to	be	nervous	during	the	festival	preparations,	and	nervous
people	know	no	pity.	Be	calm,	 it	 is	a	splendid	idea	of	yours	that	we
should	both	be	calm	out	of	consideration	for	each	other;	I	have	been
practicing	this	unconsciously	for	a	long	time,	but	seldom	succeed,	by



your	anxiety	 I	 see	how	rarely	 I	 succeed.	 I	 trust	you	 implicitly,	don’t
misunderstand	me,	 how	 could	 I	 love	 someone	 and	 go	 on	 living,	 if	 I
didn’t	 trust	him?	But	 there	 is	evil	on	my	side,	only	on	my	side,	and
sometimes	 it	 overflows	 and	 frightens	 you.	 Sometimes	 I	 think	 if	 we
were	to	unite	against	it,	it	could	not	persist;	then	again	I	think	I	know
better.
But	now	I	really	must	stop,	a	Head	of	Department	can’t	write	letters
to	 his	 beloved.	 There	 are	 about	 70	 employees	 in	 our	 department;	 if
they	were	all	 to	 follow	 their	 chief’s	 example,	 as	would	be	 right	 and
proper,	it	would	result	in	a	dreadful	state	of	affairs.
By	 the	way,	 how	 is	 little	 Fräulein	Brühl?	Was	 she	 puzzled	 by	my
postcard?	Perhaps	in	the	end	she	never	got	it—which,	according	to	a
deep-seated	conviction	of	mine,	seems	the	most	likely.
I	enclose	an	invitation	to	a	reading.79	I	shall	be	reading	your	short
story	 [“The	 Judgment”].	 Believe	me,	 you	will	 be	 there,	 even	 if	 you
stay	in	Berlin.	To	appear	in	public	with	your	story,	and	thus	as	it	were
with	you,	will	be	a	strange	feeling.	The	story	is	sad	and	painful,	and
no	one	will	be	able	to	explain	my	happy	face	during	the	reading.

Franz

On	a	separate	page,	enclosed:
Dearest!	The	devil	take	me!	In	my	nocturnal	absentmindedness	I	think
I	 sent	 the	Sunday	 letter	 to	 the	office	 instead	of	 to	 the	apartment,	as
intended.	This	letter	to	the	apartment	I	don’t	dare	send	express.	There
isn’t	much	hope	that	it	will	get	there	on	Sunday.	At	any	rate	the	post
office	has	a	splendid	opportunity	to	distinguish	itself.	Apologies!

Franz

December	1,	1912
Dearest	Felice,	after	concluding	the	battle	with	my	little	story—a	third
but	 now	 quite	 definitely	 (how	 uncertain	 and	 full	 of	 mistakes	 my
writing	 is	 until	 I	 become	 accustomed	 to	 the	 real	 world)	 the	 final
section	has	begun	to	take	shape—I	simply	must	say	goodnight	to	you,
dearest,	 although	 I	 shan’t	 be	 mailing	 this	 letter	 before	 tomorrow
evening.	The	extent	 to	which	 I	 cling	 to	you,	dearest,	 frightens	me;	 I
keep	telling	myself	it	is	wicked—may	you	never	say	so,	dearest—and
yet	I	cannot	refrain.	If	I	were	with	you	I’m	afraid	I	should	never	leave
you	alone—and	yet	my	craving	to	be	alone	is	continuous—we	would



both	suffer,	 though	of	course	 it	would	mean	a	happiness	well	worth
any	amount	of	suffering.
I	 still	 know	 so	 little	 about	 your	 room,	 dearest,	 and	 when	 in	 my
thoughts	I	try	to	follow	you	there	I	am	lost	and	somewhat	in	the	dark.
When	I	try	to	remember	your	letters	with	that	in	mind,	I	merely	find
the	 mention	 of	 a	 “pretty	 desk”	 for	 which,	 however,	 you	 frequently
substitute	the	bed;	then	on	one	occasion	there	was	a	reference	to	the
blinds	on	a	stormy	night;	no	doubt	the	box	for	the	letters	is	there	too,
and	 finally	 the	 books	 among	which	 you	 once	 rummaged	 and	 found
that	 charming	 photograph.	 (Who	 knows	whether	 other	 photographs
are	not	to	be	found	there?	You	must	surely	have	been	photographed
several	times	as	a	child,	and	also	after	your	12th	year.	Wherever	a	few
girls	gather	together	there	are	bound	to	be	group	photographs,	that’s
inevitable.)
No,	no	more;	today	my	watch	is	in	my	pocket,	it’s	2:45	(it	was	after
12	again	before	I	got	to	my	desk),	and	this	time	I	shall	and	must	get	to
bed	before	you.	Oh,	what	a	good	time	you	are	having,	I	can	see	you
dancing	with	 the	chief	clerk	Salomon,	 then	with	 the	gentleman	who
writes	poetry,	then	with	all	6	gentlemen	who	were	around	your	desk
yesterday	 when	 you	 wrote	 to	 me.	 The	 two	 Copenhagen
representatives	may	also	have	come	to	 the	 firm’s	 jubilee,	 though	 it’s
not	very	likely,	and	are	also	dancing.	You	make	me	quite	giddy	with
all	your	dancing.	And	undoubtedly	they	all	dance	better	than	I	do.	Ah,
if	you	could	see	me	dance!	You	would	throw	up	your	arms!	But	please
go	 on	 dancing,	 I	 am	 going	 to	 sleep,	 and	 to	 spite	 them	 all	 with	 the
power	 of	 dreams,	God	willing,	 I	 shall	 draw	 you,	 dearest,	 out	 of	 the
throng	of	dancers	calmly	to	my	side.

No	 letter,	 Felice,	 neither	 here	 nor	 at	 the	 office	 (I	 considered	 the
miracle	 of	 a	 joint	 absentmindedness);	 there	 were,	 however,	 endless
rehearsals	 that	 very	 Friday,	 and	 I,	 by	 my	 admittedly	 forced
renunciation	 of	 your	 letter,	 also	 had	 a	 share	 in	 the	 success	 of	 your
party.	 Let’s	hope	you	didn’t	 spend	all	 your	 energy	on	 the	 rehearsals
and	weren’t	too	tired	for	the	party.
Today	 I	 am	 being	 robbed	 of	 the	 entire	 afternoon—relatives,	 a
lecture	 by	 Eulenberg80	 (do	 you	 know	 any	 of	 his	 work?),	 and	 other
little	 errands	 here	 and	 there.	 It	 will	 lead	 to	 nothing.	 I	 am
absentminded	 and	 the	 shouts	 next	 door	 (the	 guest	 list	 for	 the
wedding81	 is	 being	 compiled—every	 name,	 a	 shriek)	 make	 me	 feel
quite	numb.



How,	I	wonder,	are	you	spending	your	Sunday?	No	doubt	it	started
with	a	shock	caused	by	me.	I	had	to	send	the	letter	express,	after	all,	I
couldn’t	 help	 myself.	 If	 it	 was	 foolish,	 please	 forgive	 me;	 if	 it	 was
right,	I	claim	no	merit.	One	doesn’t	know	what	to	do	for	the	best.	In
the	 end	 I	 asked	 myself	 which	 I	 should	 choose:	 your	 letter	 with	 its
shock	and	bother,	or	no	letter	and	peace	and	quiet—needless	to	say,
there	 was	 nothing	 to	 do	 but	 dash	 to	 the	 post	 office.	 Anyway—you
now	have	the	letter	with	its	shock,	while	I	have	no	letter—at	least	we
are	 quits.	 In	 any	 case	 I	 believe	 that	 regardless	 of	 lost	 and	 frantic
letters	 our	 caring	 for	 each	 other	 should	 remain	 quite	 unchanged.	 I
hope	 you	 agree—for	 me	 it	 is	 a	 deeply	 felt	 command.	 Farewell,
dearest,	 and	 now	 try	 to	 get	 some	 rest,	 consider	 neither	 your	 office,
your	 family,	 nor	me,	 relax	 to	 your	 heart’s	 content	 on	 the	 sofa,	 this
kind	of	furniture	is	made	to	laze	on,	not	weep	on.	That,	at	least,	is	the
opinion	of

your	Franz

November	[December]	1,	1912
Dearest,	only	a	few	words,	it’s	late,	very	late,	and	there’s	a	lot	of	work
to	 be	 done	 tomorrow,	 at	 last	 I	 am	 getting	 a	 little	 excited	 about	my
little	 story;	 my	 pounding	 heart	 is	 longing	 to	 drive	 me	 further	 and
further	 into	 it,	 but	 I	must	 try	 to	 extricate	myself	 as	 best	 I	 can,	 and
since	this	 is	going	to	be	hard	work	and	it	will	be	hours	before	I	can
get	to	sleep,	I	must	hurry	to	bed.
Dearest,	nearly	the	whole	of	my	Sunday	was	devoted	to	you,	with

all	its	happy	and	unhappy	thoughts.	How	quickly	I	became	indifferent
to	 the	Eulenberg	 reading,	 how	 soon	 I	was	 absorbed	by	you	again!	 I
left	early,	and	my	only	walk	took	me	to	the	station	where	I	mailed	my
letter.	Dearest,	I	have	you	still,	I	am	still	happy,	but	for	how	long?	I
say	this	without	doubting	you	for	a	split	second,	dearest.	But	I	am	in
your	way,	I	hamper	you,	there	will	come	a	time	when	I	shall	have	to
step	 aside,	 whether	 sooner	 or	 later	 will	 be	 determined	 only	 by	 the
extent	of	my	selfishness.	And	it	seems	I	shall	never	be	able	to	do	it	in
a	frank	and	manly	fashion;	 I	shall	always	be	thinking	of	myself,	and
should	never,	as	would	be	my	duty,	succeed	in	withholding	the	truth:
if	I	were	to	lose	you,	I	should	be	lost.	Dearest,	my	happiness	seems	so
close	 at	 hand,	 only	 8	 railway-hours	 away,	 yet	 impossible	 and
unthinkable.



Don’t	be	alarmed,	dearest,	by	these	constantly	recurring	complaints,
they	won’t	be	followed	by	another	letter	like	the	one	I	burst	out	with
not	long	ago,	but	I	absolutely	must	see	you	again	and	for	long,	for	as
long	as	possible,	without	clocks	to	measure	the	time,	I	must	be	with
you—will	 it	 be	 possible	 this	 summer,	 or	 even	 in	 the	 spring?—but
there	 are	 evenings	 when	 I	 have	 to	 complain	 away,	 for	 to	 suffer	 in
silence	is	too	hard.
Dearest,	 I	wish	I	could	say	something	amusing,	but	nothing	comes
naturally	to	my	mind;	moreover,	all	four	characters	on	the	page	of	my
story	that	lies	before	me	are	in	tears,	or	at	any	rate	in	a	very	unhappy
frame	of	mind.	But	there	is	sure	to	be	an	amusing	letter	at	10	o’clock,
and	for	that	I	deserve	a	kiss	right	now.	With	it	on	my	lips	I	shall	go	to
bed.

On	a	 single	page,	 probably	 enclosed	 in	one	of	 the	 letters	of	December	1,
1912:
Dearest,	be	so	kind	as	to	look	at	the	posters	to	see	whether	the	Jews
are	playing	anywhere—above	all,	at	what	address,	so	that	a	letter	may
reach	my	Löwy.	He	has	written	to	me	again	full	of	complaints	about
himself,	and	about	me	 for	not	writing.	Unfortunately	 I	have	 lost	 the
envelope,	so	haven’t	his	address.

[CZECH	LETTERHEAD	OF	THE	WORKERS’	ACCIDENT	INSURANCE	INSTITUTE]
December	2,	1912

Dearest,	 so	 the	miracle	 of	 our	 combined	 absentmindedness,	 assisted
by	postal	negligence,	has	happened.	Your	letter	meant	for	Sunday	has
only	 just	 arrived	 at	 the	 office.	 A	 letter	 of	 Friday	 night—from	 the
distant	past;	 I	 hope	all	went	well.	 So	you	are	 staying	 in	Berlin	over
Christmas?	 There	 will	 be	 relatives,	 visits	 to	 be	 paid,	 there	 will	 be
dancing,	and	one	party	after	another—and	this	 is	how	you	intend	to
rest?	 It	 seems	you	need	 it	 so	badly,	 since	even	casual	visitors	notice
that	you	don’t	look	well.	Anyway,	I	note	that	photographs	were	taken
on	Saturday,	so	I	shall	soon	see	how	bad	things	are	with	you.
My	Christmas	travels	have	become	even	more	uncertain	because	my
sister’s	 wedding—which	 will	 be	 celebrated	 only	 within	 the	 family
circle,	 but	 it	 is	 a	 very	 big	 one—has	 been	 postponed	 until	 the	 25th,
thus	 threatening	 to	 disrupt	 the	whole	 preceding	 Christmas	 vacation
for	me.	But	you	too	have	visitors	who	might	bar	me	from	Berlin,	and



where	else	would	I	go?	Well,	there	is	still	time	and	therefore	hope.
If	only	I	had	better	news	about	your	health!	That	night	you	looked
so	fresh,	even	pink-cheeked,	and	indestructible.	Did	I	fall	in	love	with
you	at	once,	that	night?	Haven’t	I	told	you	already?	At	first	sight	I	was
quite	definitely	and	incomprehensibly	indifferent	to	you,	and	for	this
reason	 you	 may	 have	 seemed	 familiar.	 I	 took	 it	 all	 as	 a	 matter	 of
course.82	Not	 until	we	 rose	 from	 the	 table	 in	 the	dining	 room	did	 I
notice	 to	my	horror	how	quickly	 the	 time	had	passed,	how	sad	 that
was,	 and	 how	 one	would	 have	 to	 hurry,	 but	 I	 didn’t	 know	how,	 or
what	 for.	 But	 as	 soon	 as	we	 reached	 the	music	 room—you	had	 just
gone	 off	 to	 get	 your	 shoes—I	 made	 the	 silly	 remark,	 perhaps	 even
aloud:	“She	(you	were	still	“she”	at	that	time)	appeals	to	me	no	end,”
and	I	held	on	to	the	table.
What	a	lot	has	happened	between	that	evening	and	your	visitor’s83
question	 about	 your	 unhappy	 love!	 And	 since	 to	 blush	 is	 to	 admit,
your	blushes	on	that	occasion,	though	you	may	not	know	it,	implied
the	following:	“Yes,	he	loves	me,	but	for	me	it	 is	a	great	misfortune.
For	he	thinks	that	because	he	loves	me	he	is	free	to	torment	me,	and
takes	 full	 advantage	 of	 this	 imaginary	 privilege.	 Almost	 every	 day
comes	a	letter	tormenting	me	to	death,	but	then	of	course	there	comes
another	which	 is	meant	 to	make	me	 forget	 the	 first;	 but	 how	 can	 I
forget	it?	He	always	talks	in	riddles;	one	can’t	get	a	candid	word	out
of	him.	It	is	possible	that	what	he	wants	to	say	cannot	be	written,	but
then,	for	heaven’s	sake,	he	should	stop	it	altogether	and	write	 like	a
sensible	person.	He	doesn’t	torment	me	deliberately,	for	he	loves	me,	I
know,	beyond	all	measure,	but	he	ought	 to	 stop	 tormenting	me	and
making	me	so	miserable	with	his	love.”	Dearest	speaker!	I	would	give
my	life	for	you,	but	I	cannot	give	up	tormenting	you.

Yours,	Franz

December	3,	1912
[Evening	of	December	2,	and	night	of	December	2	to	3,	1912]

That	 wonderful,	 long,	 excessively	 and	 undeservedly	 long	 letter!
Dearest,	 you	made	me	 so	happy.	And	with	 it	 the	picture,	 strange	at
first,	 because	 of	 your	 unfamiliar	 posture	 and	 surroundings,	 but	 the
longer	one	looks	the	more	it	 falls	 into	place,	till	now,	in	the	light	of
the	lamp	on	my	desk—as	in	the	sunlight	of	long	ago—the	dearest	face
becomes	so	lifelike	that	one	longs	to	kiss	the	hand	on	the	edge	of	the



boat,	and	does.	At	that	time	you	looked	in	better	health	than	you	do
now;	on	the	other	hand—perhaps	because	of	all	that	well-being—you
looked	extremely	sulky.	What	were	you	holding?	A	peculiar	little	bag?
And	who	had	stuck	the	leaves	in	your	belt?	You	look	at	me	so	warily
and	 suspiciously,	 as	 though	 you	 had	 a	 slight	 premonition	 of	 the
tormentor	who	would	 come	 to	 plague	 you	4	 years	 later.	Also,	 for	 a
mere	outing	you	were	very	carefully	dressed;	 so	was	your	brother.	 I
had	 been	 told	 before	 that	 your	 brother	 is	 good-looking.	 How
ridiculously	young	I	should	look	beside	him,	and	I	am	probably	older
than	he.	And	in	that	picture	he	is	only	25.	You	must	be	very	proud	of
him.
And	now	you	hold	out	hopes	of	more	pictures.	Dearest,	 you	must
keep	this	promise.	One	can’t	tell	 from	the	envelope,	one	rips	it	open
as	 though	 it	 were	 just	 a	 letter	 (some	 letters	 arrive	 all	 but	 open,	 it
depends	 on	 the	 constitution	 of	 the	 envelope),	 but	 then	 one	 finds	 a
picture	inside	and	you	yourself	slip	out	of	it,	as	one	fine	day	I	will	see
you	getting	out	of	a	railway	carriage.	That	flash	photograph,	dearest,
will	also	be	mine,	whether	on	loan	or	forever,	no	matter	how	it	will
have	turned	out.	To	rid	you	of	all	doubts	(not	for	the	sake	of	creating
any	 doubts),	 I	 am	 sending	 you	 a	 flash	 photograph	 of	 myself.	 It	 is
rather	repulsive,	but	then	it	was	meant	not	for	you	but	for	a	power	of
attorney	for	the	Institute,	and	was	taken	some	2–3	years	ago.	I	haven’t
in	 fact	 got	 a	 twisted	 face;	 it’s	 the	 flash	 that	 gives	me	 that	 visionary
look,	and	I	have	long	ago	abandoned	high	collars.	On	the	other	hand
the	suit	is	the	once	or	twice	mentioned	one-and-only	(one-and-only	is
of	course	an	exaggeration,	but	not	a	great	one),	and	I	am	wearing	it
today	as	cheerfully	as	ever.	I	have	caused	quite	a	sensation	in	it	in	the
best	seats	at	Berlin	theaters,	in	the	front	row	at	the	Kammerspiele,	and
I	have	 slept	or	dozed	 in	 it	 through	entire	nights	on	 seats	of	 railway
carriages.	It	is	aging	with	me.	But	of	course	it’s	no	longer	as	good	as
in	 the	 picture.	 The	 tie	 is	 a	 real	 showpiece;	 I	 bought	 it	 on	 a	 trip	 to
Paris,	 not	 even	 the	 last	 trip,	 but	 the	 first,	 the	 date	 of	which	 I	 can’t
work	 out	 at	 the	moment.84	 By	 pure	 chance	 I	 happen	 to	 be	wearing
this	 tie	 now,	 while	 I	 am	writing.	 It	 too	 is	 getting	 older.	 Above	 all,
please	don’t	be	alarmed	by	this	picture.	Only	one	good	picture	of	me
has	been	taken	recently	(a	photograph	is	good	only	if,	failing	all	else,
one	looks	as	one	would	like	to	look),	but	this	one	is	in	a	frame	with
other	 family	 photographs.	 If	 possible,	 I	 shall	 have	 a	 copy	made	 for
you;	to	me	it	means	so	much	that	you	should	hold	me	in	your	hands,
at	 least	 in	a	photograph,	your	real	hands	 I	mean,	 for	 I	have	been	 in



your	imaginary	hands	for	a	long	time.

That	was	written	this	evening,	it’s	now	night,	at	its	deepest.	Dearest,
considering	 there	 was	 no	 letter	 yesterday,	 wasn’t	 my	 behavior
exemplary?	So	completely	at	one	with	you,	as	if	you	were	beside	me,
but	had	had	one	of	your	silent	days.	In	any	case,	I	am	sure	you	never
have	such	days	of	depression,	in	spite	of	your	tears—your	only	failing,
and	 a	 terrible	 temptation	 to	 rush	 to	 you	 and	 hold	 you	 close—I	 am
sure	 your	 self-control	 is	 infinitely	 greater	 than	 mine.	 Consider
carefully	whether	you	could	stand	someone	who	for	days,	most	days,
is	 so	 turned	 in	 upon	 himself	 that	 nothing	 can	 budge	 him.	 About	 a
week	 ago	 there	 were	 several	 such	 days;	 I	 don’t	 know	 whether	 you
noticed	it	in	my	letters	(about	a	week	ago!);	in	any	case	say	you	didn’t
notice,	that	it	was	just	my	imagination.	It	would	reassure	me	coming
from	your	lips,	whence	I	expect	all	decisions	about	me	to	come.
Your	party	was	magnificent	beyond	compare.	I	don’t	know	what	it
is	 that	makes	 the	whole	 factory,	 against	 all	 reason,	 in	 spite	 of	 your
indisputable	 testimony,	 in	 spite	of	 everything	 I	 know	about	 it,	 seem
completely	 (your	 awfully	 untidy	 correspondent’s	 writing	 paper	 has
just	 run	 out,	 and	 all	 stationers	 are	 asleep),	 yes,	 completely	 unreal.
Perhaps	 this	 is	because	 I	have	 surrounded	you	with	 so	many	wishes
and	hopes	that	in	no	way	fit	a	real	business	organization,	but	would
be	perfect	 in	an	unreal	one.	This	 is	also	why	I	 take	such	pleasure	 in
hearing	 about	 your	 office;	 if	 I	 were	 deeply	 convinced	 that	 it	 really
surrounds	you	and	makes	you	work,	I	would	hate	it.	Am	I	to	get	the
pictures	of	the	office?	If	so,	you	will	get	something	like	our	Institute’s
annual	 report	 with	 an	 article	 by	 me	 on	 cylindrical	 safety	 cutter
spindles!	 With	 illustrations!	 Or	 even	 an	 article	 on	 workshop
insurance!	Or	one	about	safety	cutter	heads!	Dearest,	there	are	many
pleasures	in	store	for	you.85
But	now	I	am	going	to	bed.	I	have	had	too	little	sleep	lately,	I	also
don’t	walk	enough,	I	don’t	read	at	all,	but	there	are	times	when	I	don’t
feel	 too	bad.	 I	 am	 toying	with	 ideas	 for	 the	Christmas	vacation,	 the
summer	vacation,	and	the	 future	as	a	whole.	As	soon	as	 the	outlook
darkens,	 I	 shut	my	 eyes.—Before	 I	 forget:	 from	now	on,	 as	 a	 rule,	 I
shall	write	only	once	a	day;	I	am	being	deprived	of	the	afternoons.	But
I	am	given	kisses.	And	for	them	I	can	put	up	with	anything.

Franz



[CZECH	LETTERHEAD	OF	THE	WORKERS’	ACCIDENT	INSURANCE	INSTITUTE]
December	3,	1912

Dearest,	 just	two	words.	Our	elections,86	which	 I	may	have	 told	you
about,	are	over,	my	free	time	at	the	office	is	up.	I	can	only	salute	you
in	haste.	Moreover	I	am	deep	in	a	daze	of	terrible	sleepiness.	Dearest,
today	 you	 presented	 me	 with	 a	 wonderful	 gift	 and	 this	 morning’s
letter	drew	me	toward	you	as	though	with	human	hands.
Farewell	 till	 tonight.	 It	 is	 so	 difficult	 to	 break	 the	 habit	 of	 two
letters	a	day.	Tell	me	the	cure.	With	kisses	I	ask	you	for	the	cure,	and
with	kisses	I	thank	you	for	it.

Yours,	as	no	one	else’s,	Franz

I	am	sending	the	annual	reports;	when	you	know	them	by	heart,
you	will	get	more.



December	3,	1912
Dearest,	I	really	should	have	gone	on	writing	all	night.	It	would	have
been	 my	 duty,	 for	 I	 am	 nearing	 the	 end	 of	 my	 little	 story,	 and
uniformity	 and	 the	 fire	 of	 consecutive	 hours	 would	 do	 this	 end	 an
immense	amount	of	good.	And	who	knows	whether	I	shall	be	able	to
write	tomorrow	after	the	reading87—I	curse	it	now.	Nevertheless,	I	am
stopping,	 I	 dare	 not	 risk	 it.	 It	 is	 not	 so	 long	 since	 I	 started	writing
regularly	and	continuously,	but	since	then	I	have	turned	from	a	by	no
means	 exemplary,	 but	 in	 some	 ways	 rather	 useful	 employee	 (my
present	rank	is	Draftsman)	into	a	nightmare	to	my	chief.	My	desk	at
the	office	was	certainly	never	tidy,	but	now	it	is	littered	with	a	chaotic
pile	of	papers	and	files;	I	may	just	know	the	things	that	lie	on	top,	but
lower	 down	 I	 suspect	 nothing	 but	 horrors.	 Sometimes	 I	 think	 I	 can
almost	 hear	 myself	 being	 ground	 down,	 by	 my	 writing	 on	 the	 one
hand,	 by	 the	 office	 on	 the	 other.	 At	 other	 times	 I	 keep	 them	 both
reasonably	 well	 balanced,	 especially	 when	my	 writing	 at	 home	 has
gone	 badly,	 but	 this	 ability	 (not	 the	 ability	 to	 write	 badly)	 is,	 I’m
afraid,	 gradually	declining.	 Sometimes	 I	 look	 around	 the	office	with
an	 expression	 that	 no	 one	 would	 ever	 have	 believed	 possible	 in	 an
office.	 At	 such	moments	my	 typist	 is	 the	 only	 person	who	 can	 still
gently	wake	me.	And	now	that	we	calmly	love	each	other,	your	letters
are	also	a	definite	help	in	my	life;	someone,	and	not	just	someone	but
the	loved	one,	cares	for	me,	and	after	reading	your	letters	I	jump	up
and	go	to	work	in	a	better	frame	of	mind.	And	yet,	and	yet——
I	have	written	so	little	today,	and	there	is	so	much	to	tell	you.	How
pretty	you	look	in	the	display	room!	But	your	office	is	missing.	No,	I
shall	have	to	question	you	for	months,	most	patient	Felice,	about	the
things	you	sent	me	today.	Above	all,	do	explain	the	two	references	to
yourself.	 No	 doubt	 the	 first	 refers	 to	 your	 Zionism,	 but	 the	 second
about	literature	and	frozen	meat?	God,	from	Salomon	to	Rosenbaum,
how	well	 these	 people	 know	you!	 They	 can	 see	 you	 every	 day,	 can
ride	with	you	in	motor	cars,	need	only	press	a	button	in	the	director’s
office,	and	you	come	running.	Dearest,	dearest,	where	is	the	bell	that
calls	you	to	me?	I	overwhelm	you	with	kisses.—But	now	enough.	My
story	would	keep	me	awake,	but	the	dreams	you	inspire	will	put	me
to	sleep.	Yesterday,	lying	in	the	grass,	I	talked	to	you	about	our	going
to	the	country	together.

Yours,	Franz



December	4,	1912
Thank	 God,	 dearest,	 that	 by	 the	 time	 you	 reached	 the	 end	 of	 your
letter	you	were	calmer;	I	should	not	have	known	where	to	turn	with
self-reproaches.	 So	 now	 I	 promise	 as	 best	 I	 can—I	 wish	 I	 had	 Frl.
Brühl’s	lips	that	kissed	you	while	you	were	writing,	so	as	to	emphasize
it	more	strongly—that	(to	make	it	more	solemn	I	am	printing	it)	I	SHALL
NEVER	 AGAIN	 TORMENT	 YOU	 BY	 LETTER,	 but	will	 save	 it	up	until	we	meet,	when
amends	 can	 be	 made	 at	 once	 and	 properly	 for	 all	 misdeeds,	 not
crudely	and	belatedly	as	by	a	subsequent	letter.
You	say	yourself	that	I	do	not	want	to	torment	you;	you	are	my	own

self,	which	I	do	torment	from	time	to	time,	it’s	good	for	it;	but	you	are
my	 innermost,	 my	 most	 delicate	 self	 which,	 more	 than	 anything,	 I
should	 like	 to	protect	 and	preserve	 in	perfect	peace.	Yet	despite	 the
best	of	 intentions—it	must	be	my	pen	going	 its	own	wicked	ways	 in
my	hand.
Dearest!	Forgive	me,	and	from	now	on	the	letters	shall	be	gentle,	as

is	right	and	proper	when	writing	to	one’s	beloved	whom	one	longs	not
to	chastise	but	to	caress.
I	 remember	 now,	 even	 last	 night	 I	 was	 exaggerating.	 Things	 are

more	or	less	all	right	at	the	office.	And	even	if	I	am	a	heap	of	misery,
after	getting	your	letter	and	reading	it,	I	feel	like	a	giant,	and	like	an
eager	official	I	advance	toward	the	waiting	typewriter,	just	as	though
you	were	leading	me	to	it	and	had	promised	to	reward	me	with	a	kiss
if	I	had	done	my	work	properly.	Don’t	be	sad,	dearest!	You	succeeded
in	making	me	happy	before	you	even	meant	 to,	how	much	more	 so
now.	Adieu,	dearest,	 am	 I	quite	 incapable	of	 saying	goodbye	 today?
And	 now,	 off	 to	 the	 typewriter!	 By	 the	 way,	 this	 is	 the	 last	 of	 the
twice-daily	letters;	from	now	on	there	will	be	one	only.	Explanation	to
follow.	 I	 can’t	 get	 away	 from	you	 today,	dearest.	 It’s	 you	who	must
pull	your	hand	away	when	I	am	so	crazy.

Franz

[Night	of	December	4	to	5,	1912]
Oh	dearest,	 infinitely	 beloved,	 it	 really	 is	 too	 late	 now	 for	my	 little
story,	 as	 I	 feared	 it	 would	 be;	 unfinished,	 it	 will	 lie	 turned
heavenwards	until	tomorrow	night;	but	for	you,	Felice,	childish	lady,
this	is	the	right	moment,	just	as	every	moment	is	the	right	moment	for
you.	The	telegram	I	take	as	a	kiss,	which	makes	it	taste	good,	makes



for	pleasure,	pride,	and	conceit,	but	as	a	congratulation,	dearest?	Any
other	 evening	 is	more	 important	 than	 this	 one,	 which	 after	 all	 was
devoted	solely	to	my	pleasure,	whereas	other	evenings	are	meant	for
my	 liberation.	 Frankly,	 dearest,	 I	 simply	 adore	 reading	 aloud;
bellowing	 into	 the	audience’s	expectant	and	attentive	ear	warms	 the
cockles	of	the	poor	heart.	And	bellow	I	certainly	did,	simply	blowing
away	the	music	from	adjoining	rooms	that	was	trying	to	spare	me	the
trouble	of	reading	aloud.	Nothing,	you	know,	gives	the	body	greater
satisfaction	than	ordering	people	about,	or	at	least	believing	in	one’s
ability	to	do	so.	As	a	child—which	I	was	until	a	few	years	ago—I	used
to	enjoy	dreaming	of	reading	aloud	to	a	large,	crowded	hall	(though
equipped	with	somewhat	greater	strength	of	heart,	voice,	and	intellect
than	 I	 had	 at	 the	 time)	 the	 whole	 of	 Education	 sentimentale	 at	 one
sitting,	for	as	many	days	and	nights	as	it	required,	in	French	of	course
(oh	dear,	my	accent!),	and	making	the	walls	reverberate.	Whenever	I
have	given	a	talk,	and	talking	is	even	better	 than	reading	aloud	(it’s
happened	rarely	enough),	I	have	felt	this	elation,	and	this	evening	was
no	exception.	It	is—and	therein	lies	my	excuse—the	only	more	or	less
public	entertainment	I	have	allowed	myself	in	the	past	three	months.
In	all	that	time	I	have	hardly	spoken	to	a	stranger.	With	the	exception
of	the	one	and	only	Stocssl;88	your	Schmitz89	whom	I	should	have	met
a	 fortnight	 ago—it	 was	 almost	 exclusively	 his	 connection	 with	 you
that	 attracted	 me	 to	 him—I	 missed	 by	 oversleeping.	 Do	 you	 know
Stoessl?	 He	 is	 a	 splendid	 man!	 The	 power	 of	 creating	 character	 is
written	 all	 over	 his	 face,	 which	 otherwise,	 with	 its	 apoplectic
complexion	and	hooked	nose,	might	be	that	of	a	Jewish	butcher.	(But
wait,	there	is	a	picture	of	him	here	in	a	catalogue,	which	I	enclose.)	I
am	carrying	on	in	a	somewhat	disorganized	way,	but	if	I	can’t	do	that
to	you,	dearest,	to	whom	else	can	I	do	it?	Moreover	I	am	sure	it	is	all
due	to	the	reading,	 the	remains	of	which	still	cling	to	my	fingertips.
To	 have	 something	 inconspicuous	 yet	 something	 of	 yours	 near	 at
hand,	I	took	along	your	picture	postcard	from	the	party,	and	decided
to	let	my	hand	rest	on	it	quite	quietly	during	the	reading,	and	thus—
by	means	of	the	simplest	magic—have	your	support.	But	as	the	story
began	to	take	hold	of	me,	I	began	at	first	to	play	with	the	card,	then
squeezed	it	and	bent	it	without	thinking.	Just	as	well	the	card	wasn’t
your	 dear	 hand;	 had	 it	 been,	 you	 wouldn’t	 be	 able	 to	 write	 to	 me
tomorrow,	and	that	would	have	made	it	far	too	costly	an	evening	for
me.	But	you	don’t	even	know	your	little	story	[“The	Judgment”]	yet.
It	 is	 somewhat	 wild	 and	 meaningless	 and	 if	 it	 didn’t	 express	 some



inner	truth	(which	can	never	be	universally	established,	but	has	to	be
accepted	or	denied	every	 time	by	each	reader	or	 listener	 in	 turn),	 it
would	be	nothing.	It	is	also	hard	to	imagine	how,	being	so	short	(17
typewritten	 pages),	 it	 could	 have	 so	many	 faults;	 and	 I	 really	 don’t
know	 what	 right	 I	 have	 to	 dedicate	 to	 you	 such	 a	 very	 doubtful
creation.	But	we	each	give	what	we	can,	I	the	little	story	with	myself
as	an	appendage,	you	the	immense	gift	of	your	love.	Oh	dearest,	how
happy	 I	am	through	you;	 tears	of	happiness	mingled	with	 the	 single
tear	the	end	of	your	story	brought	to	my	eyes.90
Tell	me,	how	can	I	show	myself	worthy	of	such	a	letter	as	today’s,

its	 second	 page	 in	 particular	 filled	 with	 nothing	 but	 the	 torment	 I
criminally	 extorted	 from	 you?	And	 how	 relieved	 I	 felt	when	 on	 the
third	page,	with	the	memories	of	that	journey	not	yet	overshadowed
by	me,	a	certain	calm	descended	on	you.	But	look,	what	playthings	of
fate	 we	 humans	 are;	 you	 complain	 that	 you	 left	 Prague	 without
anyone	 coming	 to	 the	 station	 to	 see	 you	 off,	 while	 I—at	 least	 so	 I
think	 in	 retrospect—I	would	have	 liked	nothing	better	 than	 to	come
along	and	 stand	on	 the	 running	board	of	 your	 carriage,	 just	 to	 look
into	your	compartment.	(But	this	is	crazy,	I	could	so	easily	have	got	in
—but	now,	at	this	hour	of	night	the	most	difficult	task,	performed	for
the	loved	one,	does	not	seem	difficult	enough.)	It	has	just	occurred	to
me	that	in	one	of	your	recent	letters	you	wrote	“you”	instead	of	“me”;
imagine	this	error	one	day	becoming	reality!	(Calm!	Calm!	All	right,	I
am	keeping	my	mouth	 shut.)—Well,	 I	have	caught	you	out	 for	once
about	 the	 branch	 office—don’t	 deny	 it!	 don’t	 deny	 it!—you	 haven’t
got	a	proper	branch	office	in	Prague.	Of	course	I	discovered	the	firm
of	Adler	a	 long	time	ago,	and	each	time	I	went	past	 I	 spat,	 thinking
they	 were	 rivals	 of	 yours,	 just	 as	 I	 do	 when	 passing	 a	 certain
gramophone	 company.	 By	 the	 way,	 are	 you	 taking	 my	 advice	 and
opening	 a	 gramophone	 shop	 on	 Friedrichstrasse?	 If	 it	 paid	 its	 way,
you	 could	 open	 another,	 somewhere	 in	 the	 West	 End.	 In	 Paris	 an
impressive	lady	sat	on	a	raised	seat	in	the	middle	of	the	room	and	did
nothing	 but	 use	 one	 hand	 to	 exchange	 the	 visitors’	 money	 for
counters.	 How	would	 it	 be	 if,	 as	 the	 instigator	 of	 this	 enterprise	 in
Berlin,	you	were	to	get	that	job?	I	suggest	this	only	because	you	could
then	 use	 your	 other	 hand,	 the	 one	 not	 required	 for	 your	 duties,	 to
write	 letters	 to	me	all	day	 long.	Dearest,	what	nonsense	my	 longing
for	you	makes	me	invent.	Dearest,	I	am	getting	very	depressed	about
myself.	Had	 I	 strung	 together	 the	hours	 spent	 in	writing	 to	you	and
used	them	for	a	trip	to	Berlin,	I	should	have	been	with	you	long	ago,



and	could	be	looking	into	your	eyes.	And	here	I	am,	writing	pages	of
absurdities	as	though	life	went	on	forever	and	ever	and	not	a	moment
less.
No,	I	am	not	going	to	write	any	more,	I	have	lost	all	inclination.	I

will	go	to	bed	and	repeat	to	myself	Felice!	Felice!	the	name	that	can
do	anything,	excite	and	soothe.	Goodnight,	and	sweet	dreams,	as	they
say.	 Just	 one	more	 question.	How	 do	 you	manage	 to	write	 in	 bed?
Where	is	the	inkpot?	Do	you	hold	the	paper	on	your	knees?	I	couldn’t
do	that,	yet	your	writing	is	firmer	than	mine	when	I	am	sitting	at	my
desk.	And	don’t	your	blankets	get	spattered	with	ink?	And	your	poor,
poor	back!	And	your	precious	eyes	are	bound	to	be	ruined.	Here,	as
opposed	to	China,	 it’s	 the	man	who	wants	 to	 take	the	 light	 from	his
love.91	 But	 this	 does	 not	mean	 that	 he	 is	more	 reasonable	 than	 the
Chinese	bookworm	(in	Chinese	literature	one	keeps	coming	across	this
combination	of	ridicule	and	respect	for	the	“bookworm”),	for	though
he	is	against	his	beloved	writing	letters	at	night,	he	avidly	grabs	these
same	night	letters	from	the	mailman.
Now	farewell,	dearest,	one	last	kiss.	I	am	signing	myself

Franz

and	am	alone.	But	 I	am	not	alone,	 for	 I	assume	I	may	kiss	you	after
my	signature	as	well.	Dearest,	if	when	we	actually	meet	it	is	as	hard
for	me	to	take	leave	of	you	as	it	is	now,	you	will	realize	that	the	pain	I
caused	you	by	letter	was	as	nothing	compared	to	the	burdens	imposed
by	personal	contact	with	me.	Adieu,	dearest.	This	new	letter,	since	my
last	 signature,	 demands	 a	 new	 lot	 of	 kisses,	 and	 receives	 them	 in
imagination.

[IN	THE	MARGIN]	Well,	there	won’t	be	another	letter	today.

December	5,	1912
Dearest,	 just	 greetings	 and	 thanks	 for	 the	 description	 of	 your	 room.
Only	 the	 back	wall	 is	 still	missing;	 I	 imagine	 there	 is	 another	 door.
Have	you	got	many	books?
So	I	didn’t	write	to	you	about	the	elections?	But	I	did,	I	did.	It	must

have	 been	 in	 one	 of	 the	 many	 lost	 letters.	 Now,	 for	 example,	 I
remember	 I	 complained	 that	 your	 letters	 were	 among	 the	 immense



election	 correspondence,	 and	 about	 how	 long	 it	 took	 to	 sort	 them
out.92	They	are	the	elections	to	our	board,	and	it	creates	quite	a	lot	of
work,	 since	 all	 employers	 insured	with	 us	 (around	200,000)	 and	 all
employees	 (around	 3,000,000)	 have	 a	 vote.	 This	 year	 I	 shirked	 this
work,	 and	 my	 backlog	 could	 accumulate	 somewhat	 unnoticed.	 But
now	it’s	beginning	to	crack	here	and	there.
Dearest,	don’t	deny	it,	I	appear	quite	strange	to	you	in	that	picture.

You	don’t	want	to	admit	it	to	yourself,	but	your	letter	betrays	you—at
any	rate	if	one	reads	it	with	suspicion,	as	I	admit	I	did	this	time.	What
can	 I	 do?	 That’s	 how	 I	 look.	 The	 picture	 is	 bad,	 but	 it	 is	 a	 good
likeness;	in	reality	I	look	even	worse.	It	is	2	years	old,	but	my	youthful
appearance	has	hardly	changed,	though	my	night	vigils	are	beginning
to	 produce	 some	 nasty	 lines.	 Will	 you	 be	 able	 to	 get	 used	 to	 this
picture,	dearest?	And	may	this	man	still	kiss	you,	or	does	he	have	to
sign	unkissed?	After	all,	the	picture	is	bearable,	but	what	will	happen
when	 the	 man	 himself	 appears?—You	 might	 run	 away	 from	 him
altogether.	 Remember,	 you	 have	 only	 seen	 him	 once,	 and	 that	 by
gaslight	 and	without	 paying	much	 attention	 to	 him	 at	 the	 time.	He
doesn’t	get	out	much	by	day,	and	this	has	given	him	a	veritable	night-
face.	I	do	understand	how	you	feel.	But	perhaps	you	will	get	used	to
him	after	all,	dearest,	for	don’t	forget,	even	I,	the	writer	of	this	letter,
whom	you	have	treated	so	well,	have	had	to	get	used	to	him.
I	 have	 been	 exaggerating;	 your	 letter	 is	 as	 sweet	 as	 ever,	 but	my

moods	go	up	and	down,	and	today	the	bad	one	happens	to	be	on	top.
Forgive	 us	 both,	 the	 writer	 of	 the	 letter	 and	 the	 subject	 of	 the
photograph,	and	in	our	duality	let	us	also	benefit	with	kisses.	Dearest,
adieu,	I	am	very	calm,	please	be	likewise,	and	go	on	loving	me.

Yours,	Franz

This	really	is	the	last	twice-daily	letter.
Oh	God,	another	journey	is	in	store	for	me.

December	6–7,	1912
[Presumably	during	the	night	of	December	5	to	6,	1912]

Cry,	dearest,	cry,	the	time	for	crying	has	come!	The	hero	of	my	story
died	a	 little	while	ago.	To	comfort	you,	 I	want	you	 to	know	that	he
died	peacefully	 enough	 and	 reconciled	 to	 all.	 The	 story	 itself	 is	 still
not	 quite	 finished;	 I	 am	 not	 in	 the	 right	 mood	 just	 now,	 and	 am



leaving	the	end	until	tomorrow.	Moreover,	it’s	very	late;	it	took	me	so
long	to	recover	from	yesterday’s	disturbance.93	It’s	a	pity	that	in	some
passages	of	 the	 story	my	 state	of	 exhaustion	and	other	 interruptions
and	 extraneous	worries	 are	 so	 apparent;	 I	 know	 it	 could	 have	 been
done	more	neatly;	this	is	particularly	conspicuous	in	the	more	tender
passages.	 That	 is	 the	 ever-gnawing	 realization:	 in	 more	 favorable
circumstances,	with	 the	 creative	 powers	 I	 feel	within	me,	 and	 quite
apart	 from	 their	 strength	 and	 endurance,	 I	 could	 have	 achieved	 a
neater,	 more	 telling,	 better-constructed	 piece	 of	 work	 than	 the	 one
that	now	exists.	This	 is	a	 feeling	which	no	amount	of	 reasoning	can
dispel,	 though	of	course	 it	 is	 reason,	 too,	 that	 is	 right	 in	 saying	 that
since	there	are	no	circumstances	other	than	real	ones,	one	cannot	take
any	others	into	account,	either.	However	that	may	be,	I	hope	to	finish
the	story	tomorrow,	and	to	return	to	the	novel	the	following	day.
My	poor	dear	one,	you	want	to	know	when	your	letters	arrive,	so	as

to	plan	accordingly?	But	the	mail	is	quite	unpredictable;	in	Austria	in
particular	it	functions	in	a	completely	haphazard	fashion,	just	like	the
Telegraph	game	at	summer	parties.	Your	first	express	letter	arrived	at
my	 apartment	 at	 11	 o’clock	 on	 Monday;	 the	 second	 arrived	 on
Wednesday	at	the	office	between	9	and	10;	your	telegram	arrived	at
4:30	P.M.	 at	 the	apartment	 (it	would	have	been	better	had	 it	 arrived
later,	 for	 it	 might	 have	 woken	 me	 up	 in	 time;	 as	 it	 was,	 I	 nearly
overslept	and	didn’t	get	there	till	9	o’clock).	The	letter	from	the	tram
—the	 letter	 that	 my	 dearest	 Felice	 intended	 for	 me	 for	 Wednesday
afternoon—didn’t	 arrive	 at	 the	 apartment	 till	 Thursday;	 and	when	 I
got	it,	at	3	o’clock,	I	felt	how	close	we	were	again,	for	you	wanted	me
to	have	the	telegram	to	take	to	my	lecture,	and	I	had	very	nearly	put
it	in	my	pocket,	but	thought	better	of	it,	since	I	didn’t	just	want	it	to
stay	in	my	pocket,	but	to	spread	it	on	the	table	before	me;	and	for	this
purpose	 it	 really	would	 have	 been	 too	 conspicuous,	 so	 I	 decided	 to
take	your	picture	postcard	instead.
Evidently,	 I	 must	 have	 described	 my	 office	 very	 clearly	 indeed

(perhaps	 because	 it	 isn’t	 worth	 it),	 since	 you,	 dearest,	 completely
misunderstand.	 We	 haven’t	 got	 70	 departments;	 rather,	 in	 the
department	I	am	in	there	are	70	clerks.	The	head	of	this	department
has	three	assistants,	and	one	of	these,	unfortunately	the	one	who	deals
with	 the	 most	 important	 or	 rather	 the	 most	 unpleasant	 matters,	 is
myself.	 That’s	 the	 way	 it	 is,	 and	 to	 make	 it	 even	 plainer,	 he	 who
seems	 so	 strange	 in	 the	 picture	 but	 is	 more	 deeply	 devoted	 to	 you



than	any	other,	gives	you	a	long,	long	kiss.
Yours,	Franz

December	6,	1912
So	once	again,	dearest,	 I	have	been	a	prize	 idiot	 to	worry	about	my
photograph.	 You	 must	 definitely	 have	 got	 used	 to	 it	 on	 your	 walk
along	 the	 Elevated,	 or	 you	 wouldn’t	 have	 thought	 about	 me	 so
sweetly.	But	perhaps	the	headaches	were	all	that	remained	of	the	first
shock.	 Or	 it	 may	 have	 been	 the	 very	 long	 letter	 you	 wrote	 to	 me
earlier	on.	Note:	At	best,	I	deserve	frequent	letters;	I	can’t	help	it,	but	I
feel	really	unworthy	of	long	letters.	I	look	around	in	all	directions	to
see	what	 I	 could	 do	 to	 deserve	 a	 letter	 as	 long	 as	 the	 one	with	 the
description	of	your	trip,	but	can	find	nothing.	There	is	no	choice	but
to	tremble	and	read	it	over	and	over	again.
I	still	have	misgivings	about	the	letter	in	which	I	deplored	my	looks.

Goodness,	how	you	will	laugh	at	me!	And	at	any	moment	I	am	afraid	I
may	 get	 a	 telegram:	 “Franz,	 you	 are	 beautiful.”	 Then	 all	 I	 could	 do
would	be	to	crawl	under	the	table.
Just	 look,	 you	 fortunate	 girl,	 how	 in	 the	 enclosed	 newspaper

clipping	your	story	gets	public	and	exaggerated	praise,	though	it	was
only	 a	 privately	 organized	 event.	 Nor	 is	 the	 writer	 a	 man	 of	 no
consequence;	he	is	Paul	Wiegler.94	Do	you	know	him?	He	has	written
a	few	good	books,	and	has	translated	a	few	French	ones	even	better.
The	 most	 enviable	 thing	 about	 him	 is	 that	 he	 will	 be	 in	 Berlin	 in
February,	and	I?	On	the	other	hand,	he	is	going	to	Berlin	as	the	Berlin
Morgenpost’s	theater	critic,	and	that	is	not	to	be	envied.	We	each	have
our	troubles.
Oh,	dearest,	it	is	high	time	to	stop	and	to	kiss;	otherwise	my	chief

may	 come	 between	 us,	 and	 this	 must	 be	 avoided.	 Dearest,	 dearest!
Just	these	two	cries.

Yours,	Franz

Yesterday	was	the	last	twice-daily	letter;	today	is	the	very	last.

I	am	just	signing	a	letter	to	your	traveling	companion’s	husband,
who	called	you	little	angel,	you	little	angel.

I	 shall	 write	 at	 night	 about	 the	 photograph,	 which	 to	 me	 is



extremely	important	and	enlightening.

On	Monday	I	am	off	to	Leitmeritz.	What	did	little	Frl.	Brühl	have
to	say	about	my	picture	postcard?	Did	you	get	both	my	cards?
I’ve	just	remembered	that	your	letter	was	written	on	the	4th,	so
how	is	it	that	it	was	Wednesday	when—but	how	silly,	I’ve	made	a
mistake	 with	 the	 dates,	 I	 keep	 thinking	 you	 hadn’t	 had	 my
photograph	at	the	time.

From	December	6	to	7,	1912
Dearest,	now	listen,	my	little	story	is	finished,	but	today’s	ending	does
not	please	me	at	all,	it	really	could	have	been	better,	there	is	no	doubt
about	this.	The	thought	that	immediately	follows	upon	my	distress	is
inevitably:	 I	 have	 still	 got	 you,	 dearest,	 a	 second	 justification	 for
living,	 but	 then	 it	 is	 shameful	 to	 draw	 one’s	 justification	 for	 living
entirely	from	the	existence	of	one’s	beloved.
I’ve	remembered	just	in	time	that	this	is	to	be	a	Sunday	letter,	and

that	lamentations	are	best	left	for	Monday.	Dearest,	I	don’t	know	why,
but	 I	 was	 deeply	 moved	 by	 your	 walk	 along	 the	 Elevated.	 How
derisive	 the	 laughter	 would	 be	 up	 on	 High	 if,	 at	 the	 same	 time
perhaps,	your	lonely	walks	were	to	be	compared	with	mine,	and	eyes
were	to	wander	from	one	to	the	other.
That	photograph,	dearest,	brings	me	 far,	 far	closer	 to	you	again.	 I

take	 it	 to	 be	 a	 fairly	 old	 picture.	 (You	 give	 no	 explanation	 of	 the
picture,	 and	 may	 want	 to	 lead	 me	 into	 a	 trap;	 but	 happiness	 and
gratitude	 make	 me	 bold,	 and	 I	 am	 not	 afraid.)	 The	 lighting,	 the
position,	and	the	mood	of	 those	 in	the	picture	make	it	all	 look	most
mysterious,	and	the	key	to	the	mystery	is	on	the	table	in	front,	lying
beside	 its	 box,	 but	 this	 does	 not	make	 the	whole	 thing	 any	 clearer.
You	have	a	wistful	smile,	or	it	may	be	my	fancy	that	invents	this	smile
for	you.	I	mustn’t	look	at	you	too	much,	or	I	won’t	be	able	to	take	my
eyes	off	you	at	all.	You	are	wearing	a	strangely	ornate	blouse.	There	is
some	string	or	a	bracelet	on	your	 left	wrist.	Apart	 from	my	personal
opinion,	in	this	case	quite	irrelevant,	you	are	the	center	of	this	picture
for	 other	 observers	 too;	 not	 only	 because	 of	 your	 position	 in	 the
center,	 but	 because	 your	mother	 has	 taken	 your	 arm,	 or	 at	 least	 it
looks	 as	 though	 she	 has.	 That	 gives	 you	 some	 special	 significance.
Moreover	you	are	looking	in	quite	another	direction	to	the	rest	of	the
family.	Of	the	others,	your	mother	is	closest	to	me	(even	at	the	risk	of



your	mother	not	being	in	this	picture	at	all).	My	impression	of	her	is	a
little	uncertain	because	the	brightest	and	most	diffused	 light	 falls	on
her	 face.	 Isn’t	 she	 a	 big,	 rather	 bony	 woman?	 There	 are	 women
vaguely	like	her	in	my	father’s	family.	She	looks	very	understanding,	I
am	almost	back	to	my	original	opinion	of	her,	I	would	not	be	afraid	to
talk	to	her.	Your	father	looks	very	dignified;	with	him	I	would	be	less
sure	of	myself.	What	actually	is	his	business?	I	recognize	your	brother
from	the	Binz95	picture;	I	see	nothing	new	in	him.	I	assume	those	on
the	outside	 to	be	your	sisters	 (guessing	becomes	easier	because	your
brother	 is	 not	 married);	 I	 call	 the	 older	 one	 the	 “Woman	 from
Budapest,”	 and	 the	 gay-looking	 man	 at	 your	 side	 your	 Budapest
brother-in-law.	They	are	the	only	ones	actually	laughing,	so	they	must
belong	together.	The	girl	on	the	other	side	could	be	your	phlegmatic
sister,	judging	by	her	self-satisfied,	rather	sleepy	smile.	(If	a	girl	of	20
is	 determined	 to	 read	 nothing,	 I	 don’t	 think	 it	matters;	 skimming	 is
worse.)	And	which	room	are	you	 in?	 Is	 it	your	present	sitting	room,
and	is	that	the	table	on	which	in	one	of	your	letters	your	father	and
brother	were	playing	66?96	And	who	took	the	photograph?	Is	it	some
sort	of	family	occasion?	Your	father	and	brother	appear	to	be	in	dark
suits,	 with	 white	 ties,	 but	 the	 so-called	 brother-in-law	 is	 wearing	 a
colored	one.	Dearest,	how	powerful	one	is,	face	to	face	with	a	picture,
and	how	powerless	in	reality!	I	can	easily	imagine	your	whole	family
stepping	 aside	 and	 removing	 themselves,	 leaving	 you	 on	 your	 own,
while	I	lean	across	the	big	table	searching	for	your	eyes,	finding	them,
and	 dying	 of	 joy.	 Dearest,	 pictures	 are	 wonderful,	 pictures	 are
indispensable,	but	they	are	torture	as	well.
With	grave	forebodings	I	have	just	looked	at	the	time.	3:15!	That	is
too	 bad.	 But	 I	 didn’t	 start	 work	 until	 after	 midnight.	 Goodnight,
dearest!	 And	 don’t	 stop	 loving	 me!	 You	 will	 get	 my	 little	 book
[Meditation]	 next	 week.	 I	 wonder	 how	 many	 kisses	 I	 shall	 get	 in
exchange?	An	interesting	speculation	for	dreams.	Dearest,	 let	 this	be
my	last	word,	dearest!

Yours,	Franz

I	mention	this	simply	to	check	on	the	mail:	today	I	got	only	the
express	letter	with	the	photograph.

Night	of	December	6	to	7,	1912



[Presumably	during	the	night	of	December	7	to	8,	1912]
Dearest,	 for	 various	 reasons	 I	 have	not	done	any	work	 today.	There
were	 a	 few	 letters	 to	 write,	 a	 petition	 for	 the	 office,	 the	 necessary
preparations	for	that	silly	trip	to	Leitmeritz;	moreover,	 I	didn’t	go	to
sleep	until	after	7	P.M.	and	didn’t	wake	until	11;	and,	finally,	my	trip
to	 Leitmeritz,	 in	 spite	 of	 hurrying	 like	 the	 devil,	will	 deprive	me	 of
one	working	night,	and	the	recently	resumed	novel	will	have	to	be	put
aside	again—in	short,	there	are	several	reasons	for	not	going	on	with
it	 today.	 But	 by	 no	 means	 the	 least	 important	 reason	 is	 my
exceptionally	restless	longing	for	you	today.	Are	you	really	well?	Are
there	 too	many	 things	about	me	 that	you	object	 to?	Did	 I	matter	 to
you	 especially	 today?	Dearest,	 today	 I	must	 have	 dreamt	 about	 you
the	 whole	 time	 I	 was	 asleep,	 but	 there	 are	 only	 two	 dreams	 I
remember.	In	spite	of	fierce	resistance,	I	tried	to	forget	them	as	soon
as	 I	 woke	 up,	 for	 there	 were	 frightening	 truths	 in	 them,	 more
obtrusive	and	vivid	 than	could	ever	come	 to	 the	 surface	 in	 the	drab
life	 of	 everyday.	 I	will	 describe	 them	 to	 you	 quite	 superficially	 and
briefly,	 though	they	were	very	 involved	and	full	of	menacing	details
which	are	still	alive	in	me.	The	first	was	in	some	way	connected	with
your	 remark	 about	 being	 able	 to	 send	 a	 telegram	 straight	 from	 the
office.	Well,	I	could	somehow	send	a	telegram	straight	from	my	room,
the	 apparatus	 actually	 stood	 beside	 my	 bed,	 possibly	 in	 much	 the
same	 position	 as	 the	 table	 you	 pull	 up	 to	 your	 bed.	 It	 was	 a
particularly	 spiky	 apparatus	 and,	 just	 as	 I	 am	 afraid	 of	 making	 a
telephone	call,	I	was	afraid	of	sending	this	telegram.	But	I	had	to	send
you	a	telegram	on	account	of	some	immense	worry	about	you,	and	a
wild	desire	for	immediate	news	of	you	that	was	about	to	drive	me	out
of	 bed.	 Luckily	 my	 youngest	 sister	 was	 there	 at	 once,	 and	 started
sending	 the	 telegram	 for	 me.	 My	 worries	 about	 you	 make	 me
resourceful,	alas,	only	in	my	dreams.	The	apparatus	was	built	in	such
a	way	that	one	had	only	to	press	a	button,	and	at	once	the	reply	from
Berlin	appeared	on	the	paper	tape.	I	remember	how,	rigid	in	suspense,
I	 watched	 the	 tape	 unwind,	 at	 first	 completely	 blank,	 as	 was	 to	 be
expected,	 since	 no	 reply	 could	 come	 through	 until	 you	 had	 been
called	 to	 the	 apparatus	 in	 Berlin.	What	 joy,	 when	 the	 first	 signs	 of
writing	appeared	on	the	tape;	I	remember	my	joy	was	so	tremendous	I
really	should	have	fallen	out	of	bed.	Then	came	a	proper	letter	that	I
could	read	perfectly,	the	greater	part	of	which	I	might	even	be	able	to
remember	if	I	wanted	to.	All	I	will	say	is	that	the	letter	scolded	me	in



the	kindest,	pleasantest	way	for	my	anxieties.	I	was	called	a	“glutton”
and	 there	 followed	a	 list	of	 the	 letters	and	postcards	 I	have	recently
received	or	that	are	on	their	way.
In	my	second	dream	you	were	blind.	A	Berlin	institute	for	the	blind
made	a	communal	excursion	to	a	village	where	my	mother	and	I	were
spending	 our	 summer	 vacation.	 We	 were	 living	 in	 a	 little	 wooden
house,	 the	 window	 of	 which	 I	 remember	 exactly.	 This	 little	 house
stood	on	a	slope	in	the	middle	of	a	large	farmstead.	To	the	left	of	the
house	 stood	 a	 glass	 verandah	 where	 most	 of	 the	 blind	 girls	 were
installed.	 I	 knew	 you	 were	 among	 them	 and	 my	 head	 was	 full	 of
vague	plans	about	how	to	arrange	to	meet	and	talk	to	you.	Again	and
again	I	came	out	of	our	little	house,	crossed	the	plank	that	had	been
laid	on	the	muddy	ground	outside	the	door,	and	each	time	I	returned
irresolutely,	without	having	seen	you.	My	mother	was	also	aimlessly
wandering	about;	she	was	wearing	a	very	simple	dress,	a	kind	of	nun’s
habit,	and	held	her	arms	against	her	chest,	though	not	exactly	crossed.
She	demanded	certain	services	from	the	blind	girls,	and	in	this	respect
gave	preference	to	a	girl	in	a	black	dress,	with	a	round	face	and	one
cheek	deeply	scarred	as	 though	 it	had	once	been	 torn	 to	 shreds.	My
mother	 commended	 this	 girl	 to	 me	 for	 her	 intelligence	 and
willingness;	 I	made	a	point	 of	 looking	 at	her	 and	nodding,	 but	 kept
thinking	 only	 that	 she	was	 one	 of	 your	 colleagues	 and	would	 know
where	you	could	be	found.	Suddenly	the	comparative	calm	came	to	an
end;	perhaps	there	was	a	call	for	departure;	in	any	case,	the	institute
was	to	go	on	its	way.	But	now	my	mind	was	made	up;	I	ran	down	the
slope	through	a	little	gate	in	a	wall,	because	I	thought	I	had	seen	that
they	would	move	 off	 in	 that	 direction.	When	 I	 got	 to	 the	 bottom,	 I
came	 across	 a	 number	 of	 small	 blind	 boys	 in	 formation,	 with	 their
teacher.	 I	walked	up	and	down	behind	them,	because	 I	 thought	 that
any	moment	now	the	whole	institute	would	arrive,	and	that	I	should
have	 no	 difficulty	 in	 finding	 you	 and	 talking	 to	 you.	 I	 certainly
lingered	there	rather	too	long;	I	had	also	failed	to	find	out	about	the
procedure	of	departure,	and	wasted	time	watching	a	blind	baby—all
age	groups	were	represented	in	that	institute—being	unswaddled	and
swaddled	again	on	a	stone	pedestal.	But	finally	I	became	suspicious	of
the	 silence	 that	 reigned	 around	me,	 and	 asked	 the	 teacher	why	 the
rest	 of	 the	 institute	 hadn’t	 arrived.	 Then	 I	 heard	 to	my	 horror	 that
only	 the	 little	 boys	 were	 to	 leave	 from	 here;	 all	 the	 others	 were
departing	at	this	very	moment	through	the	other	exit	at	the	top	of	the
hill.	To	console	me,	he	added—he	called	after	me,	for	by	then	I	was



running	like	mad—that	I	might	still	arrive	in	time,	since	forming	the
blind	 girls	 into	 groups	 inevitably	 took	 a	 long	 time.	 So	 I	 ran	 up	 the
now	unusually	steep	and	sunny	path	alongside	a	blank	wall.	Suddenly
I	 was	 holding	 an	 enormous	 Austrian	 statute	 book	 that	 was	 very
awkward	 to	carry,	but	 that	would	 in	some	way	help	me	 to	 find	you
and	 talk	 to	 you	 properly.	 On	my	way	 I	 remembered	 that	 you	were
blind,	 in	which	 case	my	 appearance	 and	 outward	 demeanor	 luckily
could	not	 influence	 the	 impression	 I	made	on	you.	After	considering
this,	 I	 would	 have	 liked	 to	 throw	 away	 the	 statute	 book	 as	 an
unnecessary	encumbrance.	At	last	I	reached	the	top,	and	in	fact	there
was	masses	of	time;	the	first	couple	had	not	even	passed	through	the
entrance	gates.	I	placed	myself	in	readiness,	imagined	you	among	the
crowd	of	girls	coming	toward	me,	eyelids	lowered,	stiff	and	silent.
Then	I	woke	up,	all	hot	and	distressed	because	you	are	so	far	away

from	me.

Sunday,	December	7	[8],	1912
Oh	dearest,	though	my	piety	lies	in	very	different	quarters,	I	feel	like
going	down	on	my	knees	to	thank	God	for	your	letter	today.	What	is
the	cause	of	this	recurring	anxiety	about	you,	this	feeling	of	the	utter
pointlessness	of	being	in	rooms	that	you	are	not	in,	this	infinite	need
of	 you!	 The	 only	 good	 thing	 about	 tomorrow’s	 journey,	 for	which	 I
still	have	 to	prepare	myself	properly,	 is	 that	 I	 shall	be	 several	 train-
hours	 nearer	 to	 you.	 And	 then,	 if	 all	 goes	 well,	 I	 shall	 be	 back	 in
Prague	tomorrow	afternoon,	and	race	from	the	station	to	our	porter.
Letters,	letters	from	you!
I	am	devising	a	most	peculiar	 timetable	 for	 today.	 It	 is	now	3	 P.M.

Last	night	 I	didn’t	get	 to	bed	till	4,	but	stayed	there	till	11:30.	Once
again	your	letter	was	responsible.	At	other	times	I	have	to	stay	in	bed
that	long	waiting	for	it	to	arrive,	but	today	it	came	by	special	delivery
(now	 that	 it	 has	 happened	 once,	 I	 might	 almost	 say	 Sunday	 letters
should	always	be	sent	express);	it	arrived	so	early,	too	early	to	get	up,
so	 I	 lazed	 for	 hours	 on	 end	 in	 the	 afterglow	 of	 pleasure	 your	 letter
gave	me.
Well,	now	I	am	going	for	a	walk,	which	in	the	true	sense	I	haven’t

done	for	several	days;	I	will	then	go	to	bed	at	6,	and	if	possible	sleep
till	1	or	2	at	night.	Perhaps	I	shall	come	to	grips	with	my	novel	again,
and	then	write	comfortably	until	5	in	the	morning;	no	later,	because
my	train	leaves	at	5:45.



Dearest,	 please	 take	 care	 of	 yourself.	 Up	 again	 till	 3.	 The	 main
purpose	of	the	Hanukkah97	festival	cannot	possibly	be	to	tire	you	out.
So	 you	 are	 a	 speaker?	Well,	well!	Haven’t	 I	 said	 it	 before?	Will	 the
prologue	 refer	 to	 Ruth	 as	 well?	 The	 cabin	 I	 inhabited	 in	 my	 last
sanatorium98	 was	 called	 “Ruth.”	 My	 3	 weeks’	 stay	 in	 a	 cabin	 with
“Ruth”	over	the	door	has	established	certain	connections	for	me	with
that	 name,	 and	 I	 should	 like	 to	 know	 that	 it	 has	 been	 publicly
pronounced	and	praised	by	you.—One	more	thing,	I	don’t	go	courting;
if	I	did,	I	shouldn’t	have	to	envy	any	painter	(who,	I	must	say,	in	his
self-portrait	looks	like	a	criminal	ape),	but	could	let	the	whole	world
envy	me.99

Franz

Dearest,	you	do	rely	heavily	on	our	being	of	one	mind	(and	with
justification	 it	 seems),	 if	 in	 your	 letter	 due	 to	 arrive	 here	 on
Sunday	you	rebuke	me	for	not	sending	by	express	mail	the	letter
due	 to	 reach	you	on	Sunday.	But	 it	was	only	 sweet	drowsiness,
and	 thus	 for	 the	 distant	 one	 an	 especially	 obvious	 sign	 of	 your
pulsating	life.

December	7	[8],	1912
Dearest,	only	a	hurried	greeting,	and	a	plea	to	let	me	complain	a	little
and	cry	on	your	shoulder.	Owing	to	a	number	of	mishaps	I	did	not	get
home	until	7:30;	there	is	no	question	of	sleeping	now,	at	least	of	going
to	sleep,	for	the	family	noise	is	about	to	start;	I	also	have	some	work
to	 do	 on	my	 court	 case,	 the	 long	 petition	 has	 yet	 to	 be	written;	 in
short,	once	again	the	night	will	have	to	be	sacrificed	to	the	voracious
world,	 and	 you	 alone,	 dearest,	 remain	 my	 great	 consolation.	 I	 am
tired,	 weak;	 my	 head	 whirls,	 and	 so	 I	 ask	 you—it	 is	 immensely
arrogant,	 I	 know—to	 kiss	 me,	 here,	 at	 the	 end	 of	 this	 sad	 letter,
dearest!	Dearest!	Well,	the	day	is	over;	for	what’s	to	come	is	not	worth
mentioning.

Franz

[PUBLICITY	POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Leitmeritz,	December	9,	1912]



Do	you100	know	his101	story	Alone?	I	was	overwhelmed	by	it	once,	a
long	time	ago.	Apart	from	that	I	really	know	only	a	few	passages	from
The	 Gothic	 Room,	 and	 I	 must	 say	 I	 am	 very	 fond	 of	 them,	 though
possibly	for	certain	special	reasons.	Best	wishes.

F.	Kafka

[PICTURE	POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Leitmeritz,	December	9,	1912]

About	to	leave	for	home,	thank	God,	where	the	most	important	mail	is
waiting	for	me,	undealt	with,	unopened.	Best	wishes

FK

December	9–10,	1912
My	dearest,	 the	extent	 to	which	 these	cursed	 interruptions	harm	my
work	 is	 very	depressing.	Yesterday	 I	 took	great	pains	 to	 stop	myself
working,	then	the	journey	interfered,	and	today	my	writing	was	very
mediocre,	though	fortunately	I	have	not	written	much.	No,	best	not	to
talk	about	it!
The	one	 thing	 that	 reconciles	me	 to	 the	 journey	 is	 the	 fact	 that	 it
was	quite	pointless	 for	 the	 Institute	as	well;	on	 the	other	hand	 that,
too,	is	disappointing.	In	the	end	the	whole	trip	shrank	to	a	family	visit
—I	have	relatives102	in	Leitmeritz—because,	owing	to	an	error	of	the
court	 clerk,	 the	 case	 in	 which	 I	 was	 to	 represent	 the	 Institute	 was
postponed	 indefinitely	3	days	 ago	without	our	 Institute	having	been
informed.	 From	 this	 point	 of	 view	 the	whole	 trip	 takes	 on	 a	 special
significance:	off	I	march	while	it’s	still	almost	night,	wander	through
the	streets	in	the	piercing	cold—past	the	breakfast	room	at	the	“Blaue
Stern,”	its	lights	already	on	but	curtains	still	drawn,	though	now	again
there’s	an	eager	customer	looking	in,	there’s	no	one	to	look	out	onto
the	 street—then	 off	 on	 this	 night	 journey	 by	 train	 among	 a	 lot	 of
sleeping	people	who,	though	asleep,	retain	enough	misguided	energy
to	 rouse	 themselves	 to	 change	 the	 heating	 (which	 I	 keep	 turning	 to
cold)	 back	 to	 hot,	 and	 thus	 to	 overheat	 an	 already	 overheated
compartment.	Finally	I	ride	for	half	an	hour	in	a	coach	through	foggy
avenues,	snow-sprinkled	fields	and	pastures—all	 the	time	uneasy,	all
the	time	uneasy,	if	for	no	other	reason	than	the	apathy	with	which	I
contemplate	all	 I	see.	At	 last	at	8	in	the	morning	I	stand	outside	my



relatives’	 shop	 on	 Lange	 Gasse	 in	 Leitmeritz,	 and	 in	 my	 uncle’s
(actually	my	step-uncle’s,	if	there	is	such	a	thing)	office—which	I	have
known	 ever	 since	 I	 was	 a	 child—enjoying	 the	 freshness	 and
undeserved	 superiority	 felt	 by	 travelers	 when	 confronting	 someone
who	 has	 only	 just	 crept	 out	 of	 bed	 and,	 still	 in	 his	 felt	 slippers,	 is
trying	unsuccessfully	to	keep	warm	in	his	cold,	unopened	shop.	Then
my	aunt	arrived	(to	be	precise,	my	real	uncle’s	widow	who,	after	his
death	many	years	ago,	had	married	the	manager,	the	said	step-uncle),
now	an	ailing	but	still	very	lively,	small,	round,	noisy,	hand-rubbing,
but	to	me	always	agreeable	person.
But	now	I	must	let	them	clamor	on,	for	it’s	striking	3	A.M.	next	door,

and	the	child	needs	sleep.	Dearest,	there	is	so	much	to	say	about	your
last	letter!	Please	don’t	look	upon	me	as	some	kind	of	prodigy;	for	our
love’s	 sake,	 don’t	 do	 it.	 For	 it	would	 look	 as	 though	 you	wished	 to
push	me	 away	 from	yourself.	 Insofar	 as	 I	 have	 to	 rely	 upon	myself,
and	as	long	as	you	are	nowhere	near	me,	I	am	basically	a	very	feeble
and	unhappy	man;	 the	 things	 that	are	unusual	about	me	are	 largely
bad	 and	 sad,	 and	 consist	 mainly—as	 you	 rightly	 suspected	 at	 the
beginning	of	your	letter,	without	thinking	it	through	to	its	conclusion
—of	the	fact	that,	although	able	to	go	on	a	pointless	trip	to	Leitmeritz,
I	 am	 unable	 to	 come	 to	 Berlin	 with	 the	 most	 definite	 objective.
Dearest,	 draw	me	 as	 close	 to	 you	 as	 this	 unfortunate	 peculiarity	 of
mine	permits.	And	don’t	talk	about	the	greatness	hidden	in	me,	or	do
you	 think	 there	 is	 something	 great	 about	 spending	 a	 two-day
interruption	of	my	writing	 in	permanent	 fear	of	never	being	able	 to
write	again,	a	fear,	by	the	way,	that	this	evening	has	proved	to	be	not
altogether	unfounded?	And	on	that	evening,	was	my	handling	of	that
cardboard	 box	 anything	 but	 flirtatiousness,	 timidity,	 and	 probably
social	 embarrassment	 in	which	 I	 took	 a	 certain	 pleasure?	 I	 am	 sure
you	 were	 aware	 of	 it	 at	 the	 time,	 if	 only	 unconsciously,	 but	 your
memory	 is	becoming	blurred,	and	 it	 shouldn’t.	And	 I	am	 inclined	 to
think	 that	 it	 is	all	due	 to	 that	 silly	photograph,	which	 I	hesitated	 to
send	for	so	 long,	which	on	the	one	hand	has	done	me	harm,	and	on
the	other	has	not	helped	me	yet,	because	I	still	haven’t	got	your	latest
photograph,	 though	 it	 should	 have	 been	 ready	 long	 ago.	 Dearest,
please	hold	me	close—close,	close,	as	close	as	I	long	to	press	myself	to
you,	as	I	felt	on	the	whole	of	my	trip,	on	the	train,	in	the	coach,	with
my	 relatives,	 in	 court,	 in	 the	 streets,	 and	 in	 the	 fields.	 In	 my
imagination	 I	 pushed	my	 neighbor	 in	 the	 compartment	 off	 his	 seat,



and	put	you	in	his	place,	then	each	of	us	sat	quietly	looking	at	each
other	from	our	corners.
What	 is	 this	 about	 you	 not	 looking	well,	 Felice?	What	 does	 your

mother	 expect	 of	 you?	 (This	 you	must	 answer	 at	 once,	 and	 in	 detail!)
What	 does	 she	 think	 it	 is	 due	 to?	 What	 changes	 does	 she	 want	 to
make?	And	what	in	your	opinion	is	the	cause?	And	have	you	made	it
up	with	 your	mother?	 In	 your	 last	 letter	 you	 strike	me	 as	 nervous.
And	though	you	seemed	nervous,	 I	am	obtuse	enough	to	have	given
you	unnecessary	advice	on	the	preceding	pages.	But	now	I	am	talking
myself	into	a	state	of	nerves.	Dearest,	there	is	nothing	seriously	wrong
with	you,	 is	 there?	Please	answer	all	 these	questions	 in	great	detail.
All	the	rest	on	all	previous	pages	is	unimportant;	disregard	it,	answer
only	this!	What	would	become	of	me	if	you	were	to	fall	ill!	Dearest,	I
have	 to	 know	 all	 about	 it,	 it	 is	 my	 most	 important	 concern.	 Once
again:	I	am	not	anxious	yet,	but	shall	become	so	if	you	don’t	answer
in	detail.	For	you	are	my	dearest,	after	all.

Franz

December	10,	1912
I	 am	 writing	 to	 you	 now,	 long	 past	 office	 hours,	 not	 so	 that	 you
should	have	a	 letter	 from	me	by	10	o’clock,	because	you	don’t	want
me	to	write	either	if	I	haven’t	the	time,	but	I	am	writing	to	you	simply
for	my	own	sake,	so	that	tomorrow	at	10	I	can	feel	I	have	been	for	a
moment	 in	 your	 dear,	 auspicious	 presence.	 Dearest,	 what	 surprised
me	 most	 was	 not	 the	 blindness	 in	 both	 our	 dreams,	 but	 the	 real
sorrow	 you	 seem	 to	 have	 had	 on	 Sunday,	 at	 a	 time	 when	 I	 was
particularly	worried	about	you,	although	it	was	not	actually	caused	by
your	Sunday	letter.
What	 exactly	 happened	 at	 your	 house	 on	 Sunday?	 Your	 Sunday

evening	letter	is	full	of	riddles.	And	in	the	previous	letter	you	say	you
don’t	wish	 to	have	any	secrets	 from	me,	yet	now	you	make	a	 secret
even	 of	 your	 troubles,	 to	 which	 above	 all	 else	 I	 feel	 I	 have	 some
special	claim	(not	of	course	 to	your	 troubles,	 though	unfortunately	 I
often	act	as	 if	 I	had).	Tell	me	about	 it,	dearest,	 in	a	 few	words.	You
know	 from	my	 Sunday	 letter	 that	 I	 suffer	with	 you,	 even	 if	 I	 don’t
know	 that	 you	 are	 suffering,	 but	 to	 suffer	 with	 someone,	 without
knowing	 the	cause,	 is	 twice	as	bad.	Since	10	o’clock	 I	have	been	no
longer	 worried,	 because	 your	 Monday	 letter,	 so	 full	 of	 love	 and



kindness,	 almost	 energetic,	 has	made	me	 regain	my	 balance.	 (I	 had
just	read	a	 few	pages	of	 the	 letter	when	a	carpenter	arrived	with	an
application	for	insuring	his	business;	I	hurriedly	agreed	to	everything
he	 asked,	 for	 which	 I	 shall	 never	 be	 able	 to	 answer	 to	 anyone	 but
God.)	But	 I	must	have	 some	explanations	about	Sunday.	Why	didn’t
you	 go	 for	 a	 walk	 at	 all	 that	 day?	 And	 why	 were	 you	 so	 tired	 on
Sunday	evening,	and	expecting	Monday,	a	working	day,	to	make	you
feel	better?	I	could	tell	by	your	Sunday	morning	letter	that	something
was	wrong.	But	what?	What?	A	blind	man	must	 feel	 like	 this	when
something	in	which	he	is	deeply	involved	is	going	on	around	him,	but
he	can	hear	only	indistinct	noises,	cannot	get	any	closer,	and	no	one
offers	him	any	explanation.	After	your	second	letter	today	I	ceased	to
worry,	but	if	only	for	possible	future	occasions	I	should	like	to	know
what	sort	of	troubles	and	tribulations	are	threatening	you.
A	 lingering	 kiss	 for	 the	 melancholy	 lips	 of	 the	 girl	 in	 the	 last
photograph,	and	a	pursing	of	the	lips	for	the	Negro	girl	soon	to	come.

Franz

Night	of	December	10	to	11,	1912
Now	at	last	the	whole	of	the	dear	girl	has	arrived!	And	not	in	the	least
like	a	Negro,	but	just	as	she	is	in	one’s	mind	and	heart.	And	not	in	the
least	 sad	 or	 ill-looking—gayer,	 almost,	 than	 anyone	 else.	 But
unfortunately	 held	 so	 tightly	 on	 either	 side	 that	 it	 would	 take
immense	strength	to	pry	her	loose.	And	unfortunately	so	close	to	her
partner	that	should	one	want	to	kiss	her,	one	would	have	to	kiss	Herr
Rosenbaum	(actually,	it	seems	to	be	someone	else)	as	well.
It	is	strange	that	in	this	photograph	taken	at	night,	everyone—when
seen	 in	 daylight—looks	 bleary-eyed	 and	 distorted,	whereas	 now,	 by
the	 light	 of	 my	 electric	 table-lamp,	 it	 all	 takes	 on	 such	 an	 awe-
inspiring	appearance	that	I	could	not	possibly	imagine	myself	in	such
company.	As	for	a	tailcoat,	when	was	it	I	last	wore	one!	It	must	have
been	 two	 years	 ago,	 at	 my	 sister’s	 wedding.	 And	 this	 now	 most
ancient	 of	 coats	 dates	 back	 to	 the	 time	when	 I	 received	my	degree,
which	makes	it	6	years	old,	but	it	is	still	not	too	tight	across	the	chest.
What	an	immaculate	tailcoat	your	partner	has,	how	well	he	wears	it,
and	what	a	dashing	vest!
What	is	that	locket	you	are	wearing,	what	is	the	ring?	(Your	remark
about	looking	like	a	Negro	girl	makes	me	think	there	must	be	another



photograph.	Am	I	 right,	dear	careless	one?)	The	woman	next	 to	you
must	be	 the	wife	of	 one	of	 the	directors,	 and	 the	hand	between	 the
two	of	you	must	be	hers?	But	where	is	your	other	hand,	and	why	do
both	 your	 neighbors	 press	 so	 close	 to	 you?	 The	 top	 of	 your	 skirt	 is
edged	with	lace,	isn’t	it?
Never	 could	 you	 explain	 this	 picture	 to	 me	 in	 too	 much	 detail.
Which	of	all	 these	people	are	 in	your	office?	 I	 think	 I	can	recognize
Frl.	Brühl;	she	must	be	the	one	in	that	peculiar	but	perhaps	beautiful
black	dress	with	the	remarkable	inset	across	the	chest.	The	only	really
unhappy	person	 is	 the	man	obliquely	behind	you	at	 the	pillar.	He	 is
wearing	a	black	necktie	and	looks	as	though	he	had	to	work	and	care
for	 everyone.	 Which	 is	 Director	 Strauss,	 and	 which	 the	 chief	 clerk
Salomon?	 Which	 is	 the	 girl	 you	 danced	 with?	 Where	 is	 Frl.
Grossmann?	And	the	gentleman	who	wrote	the	poem?
In	last	night’s	letter	I	asked	for	the	photograph,	and	today	it	is	here.
But	dearest,	we	cannot	be	content	with	that.	We	shall	have	to	arrange
things	in	such	a	way	that	the	very	moment	one	of	us	wants	something
from	the	other,	the	mailman	arrives	at	once,	at	no	matter	what	hour
of	the	day	or	night.	By	the	way,	the	mail	is	trying	to	make	it	up	with
us.	Today	the	mailman	brought	the	first	bound	copy	of	my	little	book
[Meditation]	 (I’m	 sending	 it	 to	 you	 tomorrow),	 and	 as	 a	 token	 of
solidarity	 he	 stuck	 the	 tube	 with	 your	 photograph	 into	 the	 string
around	the	book.	But	here	again,	I	go	on	wishing	for	the	unattainable.

Franz

Enclosed	with	Meditation:
[December	11,	1912]

Listen,	I	am	not	writing	again	today,	because	I	got	to	bed	only	for	a
moment	this	afternoon,	and	my	head	keeps	buzzing	at	the	top	on	the
left,	 as	 a	 reminder.	 Wrote	 nothing	 Saturday,	 Sunday;	 Monday	 not
much	and	that	mediocre;	Tuesday	nothing,	a	fine	ending	to	the	week!
A	fine	beginning!

Please	be	kind	to	my	poor	book!	It	consists	of	the	very	pages	you	saw
me	 putting	 in	 order	 that	 evening.	 At	 the	 time	 you	 were	 not
“considered	worthy”	to	inspect	them,	you	dear,	crazy,	vindictive	one!
Now	 it	 belongs	 to	 you	 exclusively;	 only	 jealousy	 could	 make	 me
snatch	it	from	your	hand,	so	as	to	be	the	only	one	to	be	held	by	you



and	not	 to	have	 to	 share	my	place	with	an	unimportant	old	book.	 I
wonder	 if	 you	 notice	 how	 the	 various	 pieces	 differ	 in	 age.	 One	 of
them	for	example	is	certainly	8	to	10	years	old.	Show	the	book	to	as
few	 people	 as	 possible,	 so	 as	 to	 avoid	 having	 your	mind	 about	 me
changed.
Goodnight,	dearest,	goodnight.

Night	of	December	11	to	12,	1912

Dearest,	 I	 am	 in	 a	 strange	 state,	 and	 have	 to	 accept	 it.	 Today	 I	 felt
rested,	 had	 slept	 fairly	 well	 from	 1	 A.M.	 until	 the	 morning,	 had
managed	 to	 sleep	 in	 the	 afternoon	 as	 well,	 then	 sat	 down	 to	 my
writing.	 I	write	a	 little,	neither	well	nor	badly,	 then	stop,	although	I
feel	in	the	right	frame	of	mind	and	think	I	have	the	vigor	and	capacity
for	writing.	I	sit	in	my	dressing	gown	in	my	armchair	for	a	whole	hour
doing	nothing,	just	as	I’m	sitting	now	in	my	freezing	cold	room,	with
a	blanket	 around	my	 legs.	Why,	 you	may	ask,	 and	 I	 am	asking	 too.
And	thus,	if	you	agree,	here	we	stand,	arm	in	arm,	facing	me,	looking
at	me,	and	not	understanding	me.	Anyway	I	was	in	complete	discord
with	myself	today,	owing	to	having	done	no	writing	for	so	long,	and
did	 not	write	 to	 you	 this	 afternoon	partly	 for	 lack	 of	 time,	 but	 also
because	you	will	get	my	book	at	10	o’clock,	and	also	because	the	calm
exchange	of	one	letter	a	day	would	be	best	for	both	of	us—but	above
all	because	of	my	terrible	general	disinclination	and	lassitude—due	to
not	 writing—and	 because	 I	 said	 to	 myself	 that	 it	 shouldn’t	 be
necessary	 to	 pour	 out	 in	 one	 long	 stream	 every	 momentary
unhappiness,	you	much-tormented	girl.	But	now,	 this	evening,	 I	had
the	 chance	 to	 write,	 which	 my	 whole	 nature	 has	 been	 irrefutably
demanding—if	 not	 directly,	 then	 with	 an	 inward-spreading	 despair;
but	I	write	barely	enough	to	let	me	survive	another	day,	and	remain
lazily	sitting	back,	in	comfortable	lassitude,	as	though	slowly	bleeding
to	 death.	How	 gloomily	 I	 should	 have	 gone	 to	 bed	 if	 it	weren’t	 for
you,	dearest,	to	whom	I	can	direct	my	feeble	words,	and	from	whom	I
shall	get	them	back	ten	times	as	strong.	However,	from	now	on	I	shall
not	 leave	 my	 work	 for	 a	 single	 evening,	 and	 from	 tomorrow	 will
immerse	myself	more	deeply.
Never	fail	to	tell	me,	dearest,	where	you	are,	what	you	are	wearing,
what	 it	 is	 like	around	you,	while	you	are	writing	 to	me.	Your	 letter
from	 the	 tram	makes	me	 feel	 almost	 insanely	 close	 to	 you.	How	do
you	manage	to	write	 in	a	tram?	With	the	paper	on	your	knees,	your



head	 bent	 that	 far	 down	while	 writing?	 Trams	 go	 slowly	 in	 Berlin,
don’t	they?	In	a	long	line,	one	behind	the	other,	is	that	right?	And	you
walk	to	the	office	in	the	morning?	In	which	mailbox	do	you	mail	the
letter?
By	the	way,	in	this	letter	you	describe	Sunday	as	a	quiet	day.	How
does	this	agree	with	your	earlier	remarks?	The	lavish	food!	Asparagus
in	November!	What	does	it	mean,	spending	your	time	binding	books
instead	 of	 going	 for	 a	 walk?	 And	 binding?	 How?	 Oh	 dearest,	 with
such	questions	I	want	to	grab	hold	of	you.	But	what	else	can	I	do?

[SQUEEZED	INTO	THE	CORNER,	AS	THERE	IS	NO	ROOM	LEFT	ON	THE	PAGE]	Kisses	in	the	corner!
Franz

December	12,	1912
Dearest,	you	shouldn’t	do	it!	Promise	me	a	second	letter,	and	not	keep
the	promise.	I	know	you	are	busy,	and	I	don’t	ask	for	two	letters,	but
you	must	see	that	if	you	promise	as	definitely	as	you	did	this	morning
and	then	the	letter	doesn’t	arrive,	 I	can’t	 fail	 to	worry.	How	could	it
be	 otherwise?	 When	 I	 suspect	 some	 uncertainty	 in	 you,	 then	 I	 too
begin	 to	 feel	uncertain,	 and	become	more	useless	 than	ever.	 It’s	not
really	too	bad	today.	Your	midday	letter	was	kind	and	soothing,	and
as	long	as	you	are	reading	At	Sunrise103	you	are	well	protected	on	one
side	at	 least.	But	 if	 the	promised	 letter	doesn’t	 arrive,	 all	 this	 is	not
enough	for	me.
Thank	 you	 for	 Herzog’s	 article.104	 I	 have	 read	 a	 number	 of	 his
things;	 his	manner	 of	writing	 is	 pretty	weak	 and	 awkwardly	 forced,
and	 so	 dry	 that	 he	 keeps	 making	 unsuccessful	 attempts	 (in	 every
sentence)	to	put	some	life	into	it.	I	am	too	tired	to	explain	this	more
clearly.	 Here	 as	 elsewhere,	 his	 fundamental	 opinions	 are	 very
laudable	and	honestly	experienced.	The	uncertainty	of	his	writing,	the
incoherence	 of	 his	 thought,	 which	 he	 tries	 to	 conquer;	 his
undoubtedly	strong	temperament,	which	fails	to	extend	to	his	writing,
give	 his	 essays	 greater	 individuality	 than	many	works	 by	 far	 better
writers.	If	he	meant	to	recommend	good	books,	then	he	was	right	in
what	 he	 said	 in	 this	 article;	 if	 he	 meant	 to	 give	 a	 definition	 of
“modern,”	 then	 he	 wasn’t	 altogether	 wrong,	 considering	 that	 his
conclusions	 rest	 on	 nothing	 but	 platitudes.	 The	 only	 thing	 that	 is
impressive	 is	 his	 comprehensive	 analysis	 of	Werfel,	 the	 culminating
point	 of	 his	 article.	 You	 know,	 Felice,	 Werfel	 is	 really	 miraculous;



when	 I	 read	his	book	The	Friend	of	 the	World105	 for	 the	 first	 time	 (I
had	heard	him	recite	poetry	before	that),	I	thought	I	was	going	off	my
head	with	enthusiasm.	The	man	has	tremendous	ability.	What’s	more,
he	 has	 already	 got	 his	 reward;	 he	 lives	 in	 Leipzig	 in	 blissful
conditions,	he	 is	a	 reader	 for	Rowohlt	 (who	also	published	my	 little
book	[Meditation]),	and	at	the	age	of	24	has	complete	freedom	to	live
and	write.	Imagine	what	he	will	produce!	I	have	no	idea	how	to	end,
since	this	strange	young	man	has	come	between	us.

Franz

[December	12	to	13,	1912]
Ah	dearest,	how	lucky	I	am	that	now—having	barely	managed	to	get
through	a	passage	in	the	novel,	a	passage	with	which	I	don’t	feel	quite
at	home	(the	novel	still	won’t	obey	me,	I	hold	on	to	it,	but	 it	resists
me	 unawares,	 and	 I	 keep	 having	 to	 let	 it	 go	 for	whole	 passages	 on
end)—I	am	allowed	to	write	to	you,	who	are	so	very	much	kinder	to
me	than	my	novel.
If	only	you	wouldn’t	keep	slaving	away,	keep	going	to	bed	so	late—

after	all,	what	can	I	do	with	a	dead-tired	sweetheart?	Just	take	me	as
an	example,	dearest:	I	am	at	home	night	after	night,	and	even	if	I	used
to	be	a	gadabout,	as	you	call	it	(particularly	during	the	year	I	worked
for	 a	 private	 insurance	 company),	 I	 was	 certainly	 never	 an
enthusiastic	 one,	 rather	 a	 sad	 one	 who	 by	means	 of	 sleepiness	 and
unequivocable	 remorse	 hoped	 to	 take	 the	 edge	 off	 the	 inevitable
misery	of	the	following	day.	But	all	that	was	long	ago.
How	tired	you	must	have	been	the	night	before	last	when	you	asked

me	whether	I	am	still	in	need	of	something	to	complete	my	knowledge
of	 your	 past.	 But	 dearest,	 I	 still	 don’t	 know	 anything	 about	 it.	How
you	 underestimate	 my	 eagerness	 to	 know	 everything	 about	 you!	 If
your	letters	are	merely	a	comfort	to	me,	like	someone	stroking	one’s
forehead,	and	 if	 I	am	meanwhile	so	very	conscious	of	 the	passing	of
the	days	and	nights	in	your	life	in	which	I	have	no	share,	how	much
more	 am	 I	 bound	 to	 miss	 not	 knowing	 about	 your	 past,	 about	 the
thousands	 of	 days	 when	 there	 were	 no	 letters!	 For	 example	 your
vacations,	 the	 most	 important	 times	 of	 the	 year	 during	 which	 one
begins	 and	 ends	 a	 small	 separate	 and	 concentrated	 life;	 I	 know
vaguely	of	only	 two,	 the	 trip	 to	Prague	and	the	stay	at	Binz.	 I	 think
you	 once	 wrote	 that	 you	 spent	 three	 vacations	 in	 Berlin,	 but	 how



about	 the	 others?	 If	 I	 am	 to	 share	 every	 detail	 of	 your	 trip	 next
summer—tonight	in	my	dullness	and	heaviness	I	can	hardly	believe	it
possible—surely	I	ought	to	know	how	the	past	trips	went	off:	whether
you	aren’t	very	spoiled,	and	whether	I,	by	comparison,	wouldn’t	make
too	 poor	 and	 unworthy	 a	 traveling	 companion	 for	 you.	 Goodnight,
dearest,	and	a	more	peaceful	life!

Franz

Night	of	December	13	to	14,	1912
Dearest,	for	some	days	now	your	young	man	has	again	been	so	tired
and	unhappy	that	he	is	not	fit	company.	These	are	the	times	when	he
could	 well	 use—more	 urgently	 than	 ever—a	 kind,	 resolute,	 lively
human	 being	 at	 his	 side.	 Or	 perhaps	 this	 is	 just	 the	 time	 when	 he
should	not	abuse	the	company	of	such	a	being,	when	it	might	even	be
best	 for	 him	 to	 drowse	 all	 alone.	After	 all,	my	novel	 is	 progressing,
though	 slowly;	 the	 only	 thing	 is	 that	 it	 looks	 terrifyingly	 like	me.—
Before	 we	 met	 I	 also	 had	 these	 unpredictable	 moods;	 but	 then	 I
seemed	to	lose	all	contact	with	the	world;	my	life	seemed	disrupted;	I
rose	 to	 the	 surface	 and	 dived	 to	 the	 depths;	 now	 I	 have	 you,	 my
dearest,	 I	 feel	myself	 benevolently	 supported,	 and	when	 I	 collapse	 I
know	it	will	not	be	forever,	at	least	I	think	I	know	it,	and	can	console
you	and	myself	with	thoughts	of	better	things	to	come.	Dearest,	don’t
be	angry	with	me	for	this	Sunday	morning	greeting!
So	I	didn’t	distinguish	myself	with	my	interpretation	of	the	picture.
True	 (from	 the	 snapshot	 in	 your	 album),	 I	 took	 the	 girl	 you	danced
with	 to	 be	 Frl.	 Brühl.	 But	 I	 think	 in	 my	 letter	 I	 quite	 fortuitously
mentioned	the	girl	below	the	telegram	as	well,	or	intended	to.	So	that
is	your	little	friend!	I	liked	the	look	of	her	at	once.	In	the	picture	the
shape	of	her	nose	looks	very	French.	She	has	gay	eyes.	Compared	to
her,	 Frl.	Grossmann	 looks	 rather	 homespun.	 But	 they	 both	have	 the
advantage	of	a	relationship	with	you,	and	I	have	no	fault	to	find	with
either	of	them,	other	than	that	they	see	you	every	day,	and	I	never.
Apart	 from	 your	 dance,	what	 other	 performances	were	 there	 that
evening?	 Weren’t	 you	 in	 a	 play	 as	 well?	 And	 that	 young	 man	 is
already	a	director?	And	the	older	one	only	a	chief	clerk?	Since	I	took
the	director	to	be	much	older,	I	shall	now	have	to	go	over	in	my	mind
everything	 you	 said	 about	 that	 evening,	 so	 as	 to	 correct,	 in	 all
important	respects,	this	gentleman’s	age	and	appearance.



I	am	so	happy	to	 think	 that	my	book	[Meditation],	no	matter	how
much	I	 find	 fault	with	 it	 (only	 its	brevity	 is	perfect),	 is	now	in	your
possession.	 Frl.	 Brühl	 is	 right,	 monograms	 can	 be	 most	 beautifully
interpreted.	 It	 is	 also	 true,	 as	 you	may	 remember,	 that	 I	 wrote	 the
monogram106	in	your	presence,	under	your	very	eyes,	whereas	I	could
easily	have	spelled	out	Max	Brod	in	full,	for	neither	his	name	nor	the
friendship	and	love	that	unite	us	need	be	a	secret;	and	finally	it	is	true
that	B	 is	also	 the	 initial	of	Bauer.	But	here	 I	go,	 rambling	miserably
on.	I	am	in	urgent	need	of	having	my	lips	sealed	with	kisses.

Yours,	Franz

From	December	14	to	15,	1912
Dearest,	I	am	too	tired	today,	and	also	too	dissatisfied	with	my	work
(had	I	the	strength	to	carry	out	my	innermost	intentions,	I	would	pick
up	all	I	have	written	of	my	novel	and	throw	it	out	of	the	window)	to
write	 more	 than	 a	 few	 lines;	 but	 write	 to	 you	 I	 must,	 and	 the	 last
words	written	before	going	to	sleep	must	be	written	to	you,	to	make
everything	 at	 the	 last	 moment,	 awake	 or	 asleep,	 take	 on	 a	 true
meaning,	such	as	it	never	could	through	my	writing.	Goodnight,	poor
tormented	darling.	There	is	a	curse	on	my	letters	that	even	the	kindest
hands	cannot	dispel.	Though	the	immediate	torments	they	inflicted	on
you	 may	 be	 over,	 they	 rise	 again	 to	 plague	 you	 in	 some	 new	 and
terrible	way.	Poor,	dear,	everlastingly	tired	child!	A	joking	answer	to
a	joking	question:	I	do	not,	dearest	girl,	like	you	at	all.	This	gale	that’s
howling	 outside!	 And	 here	 I	 sit	 awkwardly	 with	 paper	 before	 me,
incapable	of	believing	that	at	some	time	you	will	be	holding	this	letter
in	your	hands,	and	the	feeling	of	the	great	distance	between	us	settles
on	my	chest.	Don’t	cry,	dearest!	How	does	the	serene	girl	 I	saw	that
evening,	how	does	she	manage	to	cry?	And	how	can	I	possibly	let	her
cry	without	being	near	her!	But	you	have	no	reason	for	tears,	dearest!
Wait,	 tomorrow	 I	 will	 and	 must	 have	 the	 most	 marvelous,	 most
consoling,	most	brilliant	ideas	as	to	what	to	do	because	of	the	letters
your	 mother	 may	 have	 read.	 So	 if	 my	 hand—endowed	 with	 love,
hence	with	magic,	and	now	raised	 in	 the	direction	of	Berlin—means
anything:	 be	 calm,	 at	 least	 on	 Sunday!	 Have	 I	 achieved	 anything?
Shall	I	have	to	go	to	bed	in	the	end,	as	unsuccessful	with	you	as	with
my	novel?	If	so,	then	I’d	rather	be	damned,	and	with	the	swiftness	of
the	 gale	 that’s	 blowing	 outside.	 But	 no,	 you	might	 even	 be	 dancing



today,	 and	 exhausting	 yourself	 again.	 I	 don’t	 blame	 you,	 dearest,	 I
only	want	to	help	you,	but	am	at	a	loss	about	what	to	say.	Of	course,
true	 advisers	 don’t	 really	 look	 like	me.	Goodnight!	 I	 see	 that	 in	my
exhaustion	 I	 repeat	myself	 over	 and	over	 again;	 I	 do	 it	 for	my	own
pleasure,	to	ease	my	heart,	and	fail	to	consider	that	overtired,	tearful
eyes,	red	from	distant	kisses,	will	have	to	read	it.

Sunday	[December	15,	1912]
Dearest,	no	time	and	no	peace	for	me,	so	none	for	you	either—and

just	 when	 there	 is	 so	much	 to	 tell	 you	 about	 your	 last	 four	 letters,
yesterday’s	and	today’s	(imagine,	your	letter	from	the	tram,	dated	the
nth,	didn’t	arrive	till	yesterday,	that	is,	the	day	after	the	letter	of	the
12th,	in	which	you	explained	the	photograph),	and	so	many	questions
to	answer.	And	how	necessary	your	 letters	are	 to	me	 just	now,	 for	 I
feel	so	very	dull	and	stupid.	When	your	express	letter	was	brought	to
me	this	morning	and	I	woke	up,	 I	 felt	as	though	I	had	been	lying	in
wait	all	night	for	this	particular	way	of	being	woken.	And	in	bed,	with
your	photograph,	what	a	lovely	way	to	spend	one’s	time!	Unhappiness
could	not	touch	me;	it	had	to	wait	at	my	bedside;	as	long	as	I	stayed
in	bed,	I	was	completely	protected.
It	certainly	is	the	most	alive	picture	I	have	of	you.	Bless	the	young

Volunteer!	One	hand	on	your	hip,	 the	other	on	your	 temple,	 that	 is
life!	 And	 since	 that	 is	 the	 life	 to	 which	 I	 belong,	 it	 can	 never	 be
exhausted	 by	 scrutiny.	 Is	 that	 your	 room?	 Or	 isn’t	 it?	 There	 is
something	to	be	said	for	both.	The	little	table	seems	to	be	where	yours
is,	then	the	bed	would	be	opposite.	But	I	am	mystified	by	the	densely
covered	 walls;	 you	 never	 mentioned	 them	 when	 describing	 your
room.	And	why	should	you	have	hung	beer	mugs	on	that	immensely
high	wall?	And	why,	in	the	foreground,	should	there	be	a	gentleman’s
walking	 stick,	 the	 handle	 of	which	 is	 visible?	 So	 perhaps	 it	 is	 your
visitor’s	study,	after	all.	You	hold	yourself	magnificently;	I	call	you	by
name,	but	you	don’t	turn	toward	me,	though	I	expected	you	to.	I	look
for	you	in	all	the	pictures	on	the	wall	(except	the	one	with	the	man	in
a	beret),	and	so	far	have	found	you	in	three.	If	I	am	right,	confirm	it;
if	my	eyes	deceive	me,	let	me	believe	it.	How	supple	you	look!	If	only
I	had	seen	you	dance!	Have	you	always	done	gymnastics?
Your	express	letter	today	is	calm,	but	dare	I	trust	this	calm?	I	have

read	 it	more	or	 less	 from	all	 angles	 to	 see	whether	 I	 could	discover
anything	 suspicious.	 But	 how	 can	 one	 suddenly	 acquire	 vigor	 and
liveliness	after	 sorrow	and	 fatigue?	For	my	 sake,	 so	as	not	 to	worry



me?	No,	 dearest,	 you	 cannot	 be	 in	 such	poor	 shape	 that	 you	would
want	to	conceal	it	from	me.	I	am	here	to	be	told	everything,	one	has
to	dissemble	only	with	one’s	parents,	and	if	I	am	not	here	to	be	told
everything,	then	I	don’t	deserve	to	be	here	at	all.
Dearest,	 the	business	about	 the	 letters	 seems	bad,	 for	 the	moment
irreparable;	 one	 feels	 one	 will	 never	 get	 rid	 of	 the	 lump	 in	 one’s
throat.	It	was	just	the	same	with	me,	though	of	course	with	me	it	had
far	 fewer	 immediate	consequences.	Well,	 there	may	be	mothers	who
don’t	 read	 their	 children’s	 correspondence	 even	 if	 they	 have	 the
opportunity,	but	 I	am	afraid	neither	your	mother	nor	mine	 is	one	of
them.	So,	to	simplify	our	thinking	and	our	worries,	let	us	assume	she
has	 read	 the	 letters,	 and	 perhaps	 not	 only	 she,	 but	 also	 your	 sister
whose	 answers	 on	 the	 telephone,	 at	 least	 according	 to	 your
description,	sound	suspiciously	short.	That’s	why	I	 think—since	your
mother	 seldom	 comes	 into	 your	 room—that	 your	 sister	 must	 have
found	the	letters,	and	then	called	your	mother.	Whereupon	they	both
began	 reading	 until	 they	 were	 interrupted	 by	 your	 telephone	 call.
Who	answered	the	telephone?	And	who	usually	answers	it?	Was	it	all
the	 letters,	 or	 only	 some	 of	 them,	 and	 which	 ones?	 I	 can’t	 at	 this
moment	(considering	my	present	state	of	mind,	I	should	undoubtedly
be	in	bed,	and	in	this	state	I	certainly	would	not	dare	write	to	anyone
but	you,	but	aren’t	you	entitled	to	all	my	states,	the	worst	as	well	as
the	best?),	at	this	moment	I	can’t	imagine	the	impression	these	letters,
above	all	in	my	illegible	hand,	could	have	made	on	your	mother	and
sister,	the	more	so	since	they	surely	know,	and	probably	found	proof
in	 the	 letters,	 that	we	have	spent	hardly	more	 than	one	hour	of	our
lives—and	this	in	the	most	formal	fashion—in	each	other’s	company.
How	 they	 can	 find	 any	 connection,	 at	 least	 a	 conventional	 one,
between	this	fact	and	the	letters,	is	something	I	cannot	even	guess	at
without	 further	 evidence.	 The	most	 obvious,	 innocent,	 therefore	 not
quite	 credible	 assumption	 would	 be	 that	 they	 consider	 me	 all	 but
insane,	that	you	have	been	infected	by	me,	and	therefore	are	doubly
in	 need	 of	 rest,	 in	 which	 case—and	 this	 would	 not	 be	 a	 disastrous
consequence	of	my	letters—you	would	have	to	be	treated	very	gently,
though	that	too,	within	a	family,	can	include	the	crudest	humiliations.
Whatever	 the	 case	may	 be,	we	 shall	 have	 to	wait;	 also	 the	 balance
between	us	is	still	not	perfect,	for	I	haven’t	yet	had	a	letter	from	your
mother.	 Poor	 darling,	 wedged	 between	 an	 inconsiderate	 tormentor
and	 a	 watchful	 family!	 Should	 your	 mother	 want	 to	 say	 anything
more	drastic,	the	handing	over	of	my	Sunday	letter	would	have	been



the	first	opportunity,	and	I	shall	hear	about	it	tomorrow.
Now	 I	 am	 going	 to	 stop,	 not	 to	 go	 to	 sleep,	 it’s	 too	 late	 for	 that;
also,	I	won’t	be	doing	anything	this	evening.	I	am	just	going	to	run	to
the	 station	 to	 mail	 the	 letter;	 but	 then	 I	 absolutely	 must	 go	 to	 the
Brods’.	 Frau	 Sophie	 [Friedmann]	 arrived	 suddenly	 this	 morning
(Max’s	engagement	is	to	be	celebrated	in	the	evening);	I	have	already
had	a	few	words	with	her,	but	as	it	happened,	I	was	only	leading	up
to	what	 I	wanted	to	say	and	I	am	afraid	 in	my	present	state	 I	won’t
achieve	much	more.	When	her	arrival	was	announced	I	almost	felt	a
breath	 of	 your	 presence	 and	 the	most	 intense	 expectation.	And	 that
may	be	as	far	as	I	shall	get.

Franz

Night	of	December	15	to	16,	1912
Well	dearest,	the	doors	are	shut,	all	is	quiet,	I	am	with	you	once	more.
How	many	 things	 does	 “to	 be	with	 you”	mean	 by	 now?	 I	 have	 not
slept	all	day,	and	while	I	duly	went	about	all	the	afternoon	and	early
evening	with	a	heavy	head	and	a	befogged	brain,	now,	as	night	sets
in,	I	am	almost	excited,	feel	within	me	a	tremendous	desire	to	write;
the	 demon	 inhabiting	 the	 writing	 urge	 begins	 to	 stir	 at	 most
inopportune	moments.	 Let	 him,	 I’ll	 go	 to	 bed.	 But	 if	 I	 could	 spend
Christmas	writing	and	sleeping,	dearest,	that	would	be	wonderful!
I	was	after	you	continuously	this	afternoon,	in	vain	of	course.	As	a
matter	 of	 fact	 not	 quite	 in	 vain,	 for	 I	 constantly	 kept	 as	 close	 as
possible	to	Frau	Friedmann,	because	after	all	she	was	close	to	you	for
quite	 a	 time,	 because	 you	 say	 Du	 to	 each	 other,	 and	 because	 she
happens	 to	 be	 the	 possessor	 of	 letters	 from	 you,	 which	 I	 certainly
begrudge	her.	But	why	doesn’t	she	say	a	word	about	you,	while	I	keep
staring	 at	 her	 lips,	 ready	 to	 pounce	 on	 the	 first	 word.	 Have	 you
stopped	writing	to	each	other?	Perhaps	she	knows	nothing	new	about
you?	 But	 how	 is	 this	 possible!	 And	 if	 she	 knows	 nothing	 new,	why
doesn’t	she	talk	about	something	old?	And	if	she	doesn’t	want	to	talk
about	you,	why	doesn’t	she	at	 least	mention	your	name,	as	she	used
to,	when	she	was	around	before?	But	no,	she	won’t;	instead,	she	keeps
me	hanging	about,	and	we	talk	about	incredibly	unimportant	things,
such	as	Breslau,	coughing,	music,	scarves,	brooches,	hairstyles,	Italian
holidays,	 sleigh-rides,	 beaded	 bags,	 stiff	 shirts,	 cufflinks,	 Herbert
Schottländer,107	 the	 French	 language,	 public	 baths,	 showers,	 cooks,



Harden,108	economic	conditions,	traveling	by	night,	the	Palace	Hotel,
Schreiberhau,109	 hats,	 the	 University	 of	 Breslau,	 relatives—in	 short
about	 everything	 under	 the	 sun,	 but	 the	 only	 subject	 that	 has,
unfortunately,	some	faint	association	with	you	consists	of	a	few	words
about	Pyramidon	and	aspirin;	it	is	cause	for	wonder	why	I	pursue	this
subject	 for	so	 long,	and	why	I	enjoy	rolling	these	 two	words	around
my	tongue.	But	really,	I	am	not	satisfied	with	this	as	the	sole	outcome
of	 an	 afternoon,	 because	 for	 hours	 on	 end	my	 head	 hums	with	 the
desire	 to	 hear	 the	 name	 Felice.	 Finally,	 by	 force,	 I	 direct	 the
conversation	 to	 the	 railway	connections	between	Berlin	and	Breslau,
at	the	same	time	giving	her	a	menacing	look—nothing.
I	must	admit	 that	apart	 from	 this	 I	was	also	 rather	nervous	about

Max’s	 engagement.	 After	 all,	 he	 is	 being	 disengaged	 from	 me.	 Of
course	 I	 have	 known	 his	 fiancée	 for	 years,	 and	 have	 almost	 always
liked	 her,	 even	 liked	 her	 very	 much	 at	 times,	 and	 she	 has	 many
virtues	(for	the	account	of	which	this	paper	will	by	no	means	suffice,
especially	if	I	cover	it	with	such	clichés),	and	on	the	whole	she	has	a
gentle,	 tender,	 cautious	 nature,	 is	 deeply	 devoted	 to	 him—and	 yet,
and	yet.	Farewell,	dearest,	I	wish	you	and	I	were	alone	in	the	world.

Franz

December	16,	1912
No	 letter,	dearest,	not	at	8,	not	at	10.	You	were	 tired	 from	dancing,
and	from	the	party	in	the	afternoon.	But	I	didn’t	even	get	a	postcard.
Well,	no	cause	for	complaint;	I	got	two	letters,	both	yesterday	and	the
day	 before,	 and	 who	 would	 decide	 between	 two	 such	 exquisite
possibilities	in	such	a	way	as	to	say:	I	would	rather	get	one	letter	each
day	from	my	beloved	than	two	one	day	and	none	the	next—but	it	is
precisely	 the	 regularity	 that	 gladdens	 the	 heart,	 the	 selfsame	 hour
each	day	when	the	daily	 letter	should	arrive,	 this	hour	that	brings	a
feeling	of	 calm,	 trust,	 ease,	 and	 the	absence	of	unpleasant	 surprises.
Dearest,	 I	 really	 don’t	 think	 anything	 bad	 has	 happened	 to	 you—in
that	 case	 you	 would	 have	 had	 to	 write	 all	 the	 more	 urgently—but
how,	alone	at	my	desk,	in	the	presence	of	my	typist,	of	clients	wholly
preoccupied	 with	 themselves,	 of	 clerks	 with	 lots	 of	 questions,	 how
could	 I,	 confronted	 by	 all	 these	 people,	 arrive	 at	 the	 definite
conclusion	that	 in	 faraway	Berlin	you	are	 living	a	more	or	 less	calm
and	 contented	 life?	 Perhaps	 your	 mother	 tormented	 you	 yesterday,



perhaps	 you	 have	 a	 head-	 or	 toothache,	 perhaps	 you	 are	 overtired,
and	of	all	this	I	know	nothing,	but	the	uncertainty	keeps	going	around
and	around	in	my	head.
Farewell,	 dearest;	 from	 now	 on	 I	 shall	 write	 only	 once	 a	 day,	 at
least	 until	 I	 make	 more	 progress	 with	 my	 work.	 For	 until	 that
happens,	 my	 letters	 make	 too	 gloomy	 a	 showing,	 and	 one	 a	 day,
though	 you	 may	 not	 admit	 it	 even	 to	 yourself,	 will	 be	 more	 than
enough	for	you.
Farewell,	dearest.	How	 this	word	 suddenly	 throws	 sunlight	on	 the
paper!	Nothing	can	be	wrong	with	you,	and	I	am	calm.

Yours,	Franz

From	December	16	to	17,	1912
Dearest,	it	is	3.30	A.M.	I	have	spent	too	much	and	yet	too	little	time	on
my	 novel;	 and	 now	 I	 am	 almost	 reluctant	 to	 return	 to	 you,	 for	my
fingers	 are	 still	 downright	 dirty	 from	 a	 repulsive	 scene	 that	 came
pouring	 out	 of	 me	 with	 exceptional	 ease	 (excessive,	 alas,	 for	 the
description	 of	 the	 scene).—Dearest,	 no	 news	 from	 you	 today	makes
me	 feel	 as	 though	 there	 were	 two	 eight-hour	 railway	 journeys
between	us.	Could	something	embarrassing	have	happened	when	my
Sunday	 letter	 was	 handed	 over?	 Well,	 I	 shall	 certainly	 know
tomorrow;	without	this	reassuring	thought	I	would	prefer	to	walk	up
and	 down	 my	 room	 all	 night	 instead	 of	 going	 to	 bed.—Goodnight
now,	my	dearest	 girl,	 be	 true	 to	me,	provided	 it	 doesn’t	 do	you	 too
much	 harm,	 and	 understand	 that	 I	 belong	 to	 you	 as	 much	 as	 any
object	in	your	room.

Yours,	Franz

Night	of	December	17	to	18,	1912
My	dearest	girl,	all	the	writing	I	did	today	on	my	novel	was	nothing
but	a	suppressed	desire	to	write	to	you,	and	now	I	have	been	punished
on	 both	 sides;	 what	 I	 wrote	 is	 pretty	 poor	 (so	 as	 not	 to	 keep
complaining:	yesterday	 I	had	a	good	night;	 I	 could	and	 should	have
prolonged	 it	 indefinitely),	 and	 toward	 you,	 dearest,	 it	 has	made	me
disgruntled	and	altogether	unworthy.
If	 only	 I	 could	 spend	 a	 short	 while	 in	 your	 nice	 office,	 where
everything	 seems	 pleasant!	 If	 only	 I	 could	 take	 the	 place	 of	 one	 of



your	little	girls	for	a	day,	these	girls	who	are	free	to	come	up	to	you
whenever	 they	 like,	 kiss	 you,	 and	 put	 their	 arms	 around	 you.	 (I
wonder	why	 they	 kissed	 you	when	 the	 book	 arrived,	 and	why	 they
were	 particularly	 excited	when	 they	 kissed	 you?	 It	 could	 only	 have
been	 out	 of	 instinctive	 compassion,	 as	 deep	 as	 it	 was	 sincere,	 that
their	 great	 friend	 and	 a	 man	 like	 me—no	more,	 I	 am	 only	 hurting
your	 feelings,	 and	 mine).	 But	 what	 I	 really	 need,	 dearest,	 is	 your
presence!	 If	 only	 I	 could	 be	 in	 your	 office!	 When	 I	 stand	 by	 my
depressing	office	desk—it	must	be	several	times	larger	than	yours;	 it
has	to	be	that	big,	or	it	would	never	accommodate	all	the	mess—and
think	that	after	all	it	might	not	be	altogether	impossible	for	us	to	be	in
the	same	office,	I	feel	like	turning	over	the	desks,	breaking	the	glass	in
the	cupboard	doors,	insulting	my	chief;	but	since	I	haven’t	really	the
strength	to	carry	out	these	sudden	impulses,	I	do	nothing	of	the	kind;	I
stand	 there	 as	 before,	 holding	 a	 document	 I	 am	 supposed	 to	 be
reading,	 but	 in	 fact	 I	 stare	 sleepily	 beyond	 it	 toward	 the	 door	 that
should	 open	 to	 allow	 the	 carrier	 of	 your	 letter	 to	 enter.	 Do	 look
around	your	office	(which,	incidentally,	you	have	not	described	to	me	yet)
to	see	whether	perhaps	in	some	little	corner	there	may	not	be	a	spare
place	for	me.	Tell	me	exactly	where	it	is,	and	I	shall	occupy	it	every
single	day,	if	not	in	fact,	nevertheless	without	fail,	and,	if	you	like,	I
will	allot	a	place	in	my	office	to	you	(there	is	no	more	suitable	place
than	the	one	right	next	to	me)	and	then	we	shall	sit,	if	not	in	one	and
the	 same	 office,	 at	 least	 together	 in	 two	 offices.	 You	moreover	will
have	the	immense	advantage	on	evenings	when	you	are	alone	in	the
office	writing	to	me,	of	having	me	to	keep	off	and	chase	away	all	the
mice	from	around	your	desk;	while	I,	on	the	other	hand,	will	suffer	on
those	evenings	from	the	disadvantage	of	not	having	the	sense	to	allow
you	 to	 finish	writing	 your	 letters	 to	me;	 instead,	 I	 shall	 come	up	 to
you,	take	the	hand	that	is	trying	to	write,	hold	it,	and	refuse	to	let	it
go.
Your	little	girls	behave	in	a	charming,	touching	way;	but	this	does
not	surprise	me;	it	is	what	I	expect	of	them.	I	can	never	hear	enough
about	 your	 office.	 Offices	 with	 a	 lot	 of	 girls	must	 be	 very	 different
from	those	with	men.	My	typist	for	example	would	never	meet	me	at
my	tailor’s	with	a	rose	(you	can’t	 imagine	how	funny	this	thought	is
without	having	 seen	 the	man	whom,	as	 a	matter	of	 fact,	 I	 like	very
much),	but	then	he	can	do	other	things	instead.	Once,	for	instance,	in
the	presence	of	reliable	witnesses,	he	ate	76	of	our	penny	rolls	at	one
sitting,	and	on	another	occasion	25	hard-boiled	eggs—feats	he	would



repeat	 with	 pleasure	 any	 day	 he	 had	 the	 chance.	 In	 particular	 he
extols	 the	pleasant	 feeling	of	warmth	he	claims	one	has	after	 eating
25	hard-boiled	eggs.
But	 for	 heaven’s	 sake,	 what	 am	 I	 doing	 with	 the	 few	moments	 I

have	 with	 you	 on	 paper!	 Of	 course	 I	 did	 you	 an	 injustice	 in
yesterday’s	 letter,	 dearest,	 kindest	 girl!	 (What	 else	 am	 I	 good	 for,
except	to	do	you	injustice?)	On	Sunday	you	were	tired	(you	didn’t	do
any	cooking,	despite	last	week’s	promise	to	your	mother)	and	also—as
I	 felt	 in	my	own	head—you	 still	had	a	headache	on	Monday	 (and	a
sore	throat	as	well?	Shame!	Shame!	Yours	and	mine!	The	beloved	of	a
believer	in	natural	therapy	has	a	sore	throat!).	And	yet	in	spite	of	all
this,	 you	 wrote	 to	 me	 on	 Sunday,	 but	 apparently	 the	 letter	 and
postcard,	 by	 some	 still	 inexplicable	 delivery,	 didn’t	 reach	 the	 office
until	 Monday	 evening.	 In	 any	 case,	 I	 found	 the	 letter	 and	 postcard
first	 thing	 on	 Tuesday,	 downstairs	 with	 the	 porter.	 Oh,	 what	 joy!	 I
fairly	danced	up	those	stairs!
Something	 important	 is	 missing	 from	 your	 letters,	 dearest!	 There

isn’t	a	word	about	your	mother,	and	nothing	about	the	theories	on	the
letter	incident	in	my	Sunday	letter.	Is	this	a	good,	is	 it	a	bad	sign?	I
haven’t	got	 the	postcard	 from	the	party	on	me,	 I	 left	 it	 in	my	office
coat,	but	 isn’t	 there	a	 signature	on	 it,	Tony	Bauer,110	and	didn’t	 she
add	 greetings	 to	 her	 name?	 Is	 that	 your	 sister?	 And	 who	 are	 the
others?	I	can	well	believe	that	none	of	your	dancing	partners	could	be
compared	 to	me	 as	 far	 as	 dancing	 goes.	 There	 are	 probably	 various
reasons	 for	 my	 inability	 to	 dance.	 Perhaps	 I	 should	 have	 practiced
more	on	my	own;	when	dancing	with	girls	I	was	always	both	too	shy
and	 too	 absentminded.	 I	 remember	 a	 young,	 undoubtedly	 very
energetic	 fellow	 in	our	dancing	class	who	always	practiced	his	 steps
alone	in	a	corner,	while	couples	danced	all	around	him.	I	don’t	know
if	he	really	 learned	to	dance	 in	 this	way,	but	 I	do	know	that	 I	often
used	 to	 glance	 at	 him,	 envying	 him	 his	 determination	 and
independence.
Sophie	F[riedmann]	has	 left	 again,	 they	are	 taking	a	holiday,	 and

have	 gone	 to	 the	 Semmering,111	 I	 think.	 I	 am	 delighted	 that	 you
haven’t	written	 to	her	 for	 such	 a	 long	 time.	However,	 as	 I	 told	 you
before,	she	has	abundantly	avenged	that	delight.—That’s	all,	and	now
alone	again.

Franz



From	December	18	to	19,	1912
Dearest,	2:30,	spent	the	afternoon	with	Max	looking	at	furnishings	for
his	apartment,	the	evening	with	my	family,	the	early	part	of	the	night
in	cursory	work;	now	with	your	letter,	dearest	girl,	somewhat	late,	my
real	day	begins.
So	 that’s	 supposed	 to	 be	 the	 sad	 little	 typist	 from	Weissensee?112
But	she	seems	bright	and	 jolly,	and	 the	angle	of	her	 right	knee	puts
almost	the	entire	rather	stiff	row	of	horribly	Christian-looking	girls	in
marching	position.	Are	any	of	your	friends	among	them?	Say	so,	and
at	once	they	will	be	dear	to	me;	even	the	tall,	frightening	one,	dressed
in	black,	will	be	dear	and	close	to	me.	What	a	searching	look	you	give
me	 from	 that	 picture!	 The	way	 your	 right-hand	 neighbor	 holds	 you
tight	around	the	waist,	as	though	she	knew	perfectly	well	whom	she	is
holding.	You	are	carrying	a	book,	what	is	it?	You	must	have	led	a	real
country	life	at	Weissensee.	The	shrubs,	the	fence,	the	glass	door	in	the
background	don’t	look	very	officelike.	I	would	so	much	like	to	know
something	about	you	from	the	days	when	you	were	happy	enough	to
suffer	only	from	the	office.	What	was	your	supervisor	like?	I	can’t	see
you	 running	 after	 her	 to	 her	 dressmaker	with	 a	 rose	when	 she	was
cross.	 And	 what	 about	 the	 row	 with	 the	 secretary	 in	 your	 present
position?	How	was	it	settled?
For	 the	 time	 being,	 dearest,	 I	 am	 not	 going	 to	 send	 you	 a
photograph.	 The	 next	 one	 will	 be	 the	 good	 picture	 I	 wrote	 to	 you
about,	without	having	ordered	it	yet,	because	it	is	rather	difficult	for
me	 to	get	 to	 the	photographer;	but	 I	will	do	 so	within	 the	next	 few
days.	 I	 don’t	 have	 any	 very	 recent	 pictures,	 and	 have	 no	 group
photograph	in	my	possession;	besides,	I	wasn’t	very	fond	of	the	groups
of	which	I	formed	a	part	(life	for	a	girl	among	girls	is	more	pleasant
and	affectionate	than	for	a	man	among	men),	and	I	don’t	want	to	send
the	other	pictures	for	the	time	being,	because	I	am	afraid	that	through
no	fault	of	my	own,	and	quite	unjustly,	I	look	rather	peculiar	in	all	of
them.	 But	 as	 for	 telling	 you	 things,	 there	 is	 of	 course	 a	 great	 deal
more;	on	Sundays	let	us	plunge	into	bygone	days.
But	dearest,	here	I	go	on	writing	quite	happily,	and	you	may	be	ill?
In	 your	 letter	 after	 reading	 Schilling’s	 Flight	 you	 even	 mention	 the
possibility	of	 influenza.	For	heaven’s	sake,	dearest,	you	to	whom	my
life	 is	 devoted,	 take	 care	 of	 yourself!	 I	must	 admit,	when	 I	 think	 of
you	 being	 ill,	 my	 first	 thought	 is	 not	 of	 your	 suffering,	 but	 of	 the
possibility	 of	 not	 hearing	 from	 you,	 and	 then,	 driven	 by	 despair,	 of



hitting	out	at	all	and	sundry.	On	Tuesday	the	sore	throat	had	turned
into	 sniffles;	 this,	 I	 take	 it,	 is	 an	 improvement	 in	 these—to	 me
completely	 unknown—colds.	 But	 are	 you	 still	 in	 the	 grip	 of	 those
headaches?	 I	 can	 see	 you	 after	 sealing	 your	 last	 letter,	 getting	 out
your	aspirin	and	swallowing.	I	shudder.
Well,	 today	 I	went	 to	 the	Brods’;	 I	would	 have	 gone	 anyway,	 but
after	 your	 second	 letter	 this	 morning	 I	 had	 a	 particular	 reason	 for
hurrying	 because—this	 is	 crazy,	 no	 doubt—I	 wanted	 to	 catch	 the
postcard	you	had	written	to	Sophie	F[riedmann],	for	I	can	never	see
enough	 of	what	 you	 have	written.	 I	was	 quite	wild	with	 joy	 at	 the
prospect	 of	 holding	 for	 a	 few	 moments	 this	 postcard	 addressed	 to
someone	 else,	 of	 reading	 it	 slowly	 and	 being	 able	 to	 say	 to	myself:
“This	 is	 from	my	dearest	girl.”	 It	all	went	off	very	well;	 I	had	posed
my	 questions	 inconspicuously	 and	 driven	 them	 all	 carefully	 toward
the	 crucial	 reply,	 only	 to	 hear	 in	 the	 end	 that	 Director	 Brod	 had
forwarded	 to	 Vienna	 Sophie’s	 mail,	 including	 your	 postcard,	 about
half	an	hour	earlier.	It	was	all	I	could	do	not	to	bang	the	table.
On	 account	 of	 the	 gale	 outside—a	 moment	 ago,	 owing	 to	 the
general	 vibration,	 the	 badly	 fitting	 front	 door	 opened	 of	 its	 own
accord—I	 must	 have	 failed	 to	 hear	 the	 clock	 outside—I	 don’t	 even
know	which	 one,	 it	 can	 only	 be	 heard	 at	 night—for	 it	 is	 now	3:30.
Farewell,	my	dearest.	No,	 I	didn’t	 imagine	my	being	alone	with	you
the	 way	 you	 do.	 If	 I	 want	 the	 impossible,	 I	 want	 it	 in	 its	 entirety.
Entirely	alone,	dearest,	I	wanted	us	to	be	entirely	alone	on	this	earth,
entirely	alone	under	the	sky,	and	to	lead	my	life,	my	life	that	is	yours,
without	distraction	and	with	complete	concentration,	in	you.

Franz

From	December	19	to	20,	1912
Well,	my	dearest	 girl,	 it	 is	 evening	 again	 after	 a	 sleepless	 afternoon
(sleepless	afternoon	sounds	worse	than	sleepless	night);	there	won’t	be
any	 more	 writing,	 only	 to	 this	 girl	 to	 whom	 one	 always	 wants	 to
write,	from	whom	one	always	wants	to	hear,	with	whom	one	always
longs	to	be,	in	whom	one	longs	to	lose	oneself.
But	I	beg	you,	dearest	one,	tell	me	straight	for	once,	how	can	it	be?
You,	who	wrote	that	you	are	never	ill	(I	hadn’t	even	bothered	to	ask,
for	one	could	see	the	healthy	look	in	your	cheeks	and	eyes),	are	now
going	from	doctor	to	doctor;	you	must	have	been	ailing	every	day	for



weeks;	one	says	to	you	in	fun	and	yet	half-seriously	that	you	look	like
a	corpse	on	leave	(an	expression	I	should	like	very	much	were	it	not
applied	to	you);	recently	you	have	had	headaches,	sore	throats,	states
of	 languor,	 and	 all	 these	 repeatedly	 and	 actually	without	 a	 break—
dearest,	we	 surely	 cannot	accept	 this	 calmly?	Surely	we	must	 try	 to
put	 things	 right?	 Well,	 how	 are	 you	 going	 to	 start	 taking	 care	 of
yourself?	You	must	write	and	 tell	me	about	 it	at	once	and	 in	detail,
for	I	am	as	much	involved	in	your	suffering	as	you	are.	I	don’t	exactly
get	a	sore	throat	every	time	you	have	one,	but	when	I	hear	about	it,
or	suspect	it,	even	only	fear	it,	I	suffer	from	it	no	less	than	you,	in	my
own	way.	And	I	suffer	even	more	from	your	exhaustion,	and	more	still
from	your	headaches.	And	 if	 you	 then	 take	 some	aspirin,	 then	 I	 too
feel	physically	sick.	All	last	night,	that	is	from	3:30	to	7:30,	and	into
the	early	part	of	the	morning,	I	felt	a	strange	kind	of	pressure	inside
myself	such	as	I	never	remember	feeling	before	in	the	30	years	of	my
life;	it	emanated	neither	from	the	stomach,	nor	from	the	heart,	nor	the
lungs,	but	perhaps	from	all	 three	together.	 It	subsided	in	daylight.	 If
you	took	some	aspirin	yesterday,	then	I	am	sure	it	was	due	to	that;	if
not,	 to	 the	 previous	 aspirins;	 if	 not	 that	 either,	 then	 perhaps	 it	was
due	 to	my	bad	writing,	 and	 if	 in	 the	 end	 it	wasn’t	 that	 either,	 then
perhaps	I	am	just	a	madman	who	in	his	mind	lays	his	hands	on	your
temples	many	times,	and	hopes	his	kisses	may	have	the	power	to	kiss
away	from	your	forehead	all	the	headaches,	from	the	dimmest	past	to
your	 golden	 future.	 So	 tell	 me,	 dearest,	 what	 are	 you	 going	 to	 do,
things	cannot	go	on	 like	 this.	You	must	make	enough	 time	 to	 sleep,
and	go	 for	walks,	whatever	 the	 cost.	At	 the	 end	of	 office	hours	 you
must	leave	at	once,	you	must	go	for	a	walk,	and	not	alone	along	the
Elevated,	but	with	people	you	like.	(But	don’t	you	go	skating?	And	it’s
some	time	since	 I	heard	you	mention	gymnastics.)	And	 it	would	not
be	a	bad	 thing	 to	 stop	working	with	 the	professor;	you	can	write	 to
me	in	the	evening,	certainly;	you	haven’t	the	time	during	the	day,	but
to	 condemn	myself	 to	 have	 no	 news	 of	 you	 every	 day,	 I	 definitely
haven’t	 the	 strength	 to	 do	 that;	 but	 I	 shall	 grit	 my	 teeth	 and	 be
satisfied	with	a	daily	postcard	until	such	time	as	you	are	(even	in	your
mother’s	 opinion)	 completely,	 fundamentally,	 lastingly,	 as	 fresh	 and
rested	as	before.	I	am	anxious	for	the	ringing	applause	my	suggestions
will	receive	(in	which	case	I	have	others	in	readiness)	and	for	further
similar	suggestions	you	are	going	to	add	to	mine.
When	you	are	strong	again,	then	I	shall	really	want	to	hear	a	great,

great	 deal	 about	 your	 childhood;	 your	 last	 letter	 gave	 me	 a



tremendous	appetite	for	it.	Of	course	there	are	disadvantages	in	being
a	late-born	child,	but	the	advantages	compared	to	those	of	a	firstborn,
of	which	 I	 am	 the	 sad	but	 perfect	 example,	 are	 after	 all	 very	 great.
These	 late-born	 ones	 are	 at	 once	 surrounded	 by	 a	 variety	 of	 partly
undergone,	 partly	 striven-for	 realizations,	 experiences,	 discoveries,
conquests,	 by	 their	brothers	 and	 sisters,	 and	 the	advantages,	 advice,
and	 encouragement	 gained	 by	 this	 close	 and	wholly	 interdependent
family	life	are	enormous.	By	then	the	family	is	far	better	equipped	to
deal	 with	 them;	 the	 parents,	 as	 far	 as	 it	 is	 possible	 for	 them,	 have
learned	 from	 their	mistakes	 (which,	 however,	 have	 also	made	 them
more	 obstinate);	 and	 automatically	 these	 late-born	 ones	 are	 settled
more	 warmly	 in	 the	 nest;	 less	 attention	 is	 paid	 to	 them;	 here
advantage	 and	 disadvantage	 fluctuate,	 the	 latter	 never	 dominating,
but	they	don’t	need	it,	for	everyone	is	unconsciously,	thus	all	the	more
deeply	and	less	harmfully,	concerned	with	them.	I	am	the	eldest	of	six
brothers	 and	 sisters;	 two	 brothers	 somewhat	 younger	 than	 I	 died	 in
infancy	through	the	fault	of	the	doctors;	then	there	was	a	pause;	I	was
the	only	child	until	4–5	years	later	my	three	sisters	arrived,	separated
by	one	and	two	years	respectively.	Thus	I	lived	alone	for	a	very	long
time,	 battling	 with	 nurses,	 old	 nannies,	 spiteful	 cooks,	 unhappy
governesses,	 since	 my	 parents	 were	 always	 at	 the	 shop.	 There	 is	 a
great	deal	to	be	said	about	all	this.	But	not	tonight,	the	12th	hour	of
which,	to	my	horror,	is	just	striking.	Farewell,	my	dearest,	and	at	the
risk	of	waking	you,	at	the	risk	of	waking	you,	I	kiss	you.

Franz

December	20,	1912
But	dearest,	what	is	it	that	makes	you	so	anxious?	Are	we	not	living
side	by	 side	as	peacefully	 as	 is	possible	 in	 this	misery?	What	 comes
over	 you?	 You	 are	 at	 once	 both	 the	 quiet	 and	 the	 confusion	 of	my
heart;	 imagine	my	heartbeat	when	you	are	 in	 this	 state.	 I	have	 read
your	 letter	 many	 times	 with	 burning	 cheeks	 in	 the	 hope	 that	 some
kind	of	peace,	some	kind	of	gaiety,	would	somewhere	show	itself.	 It
was	surely	only	the	mood	of	an	unfortunate	evening,	and	my	agitated
scrap	 from	 the	 office,	 which	 I	 might	 as	 well	 enclose,	 is	 really	 no
longer	 true.	 For	 I	 know	 that	 tomorrow	will	 again	 bring	 a	 confident
letter	 from	 my	 strong	 girl,	 who	 was	 overcome	 by	 exhaustion	 and
terrible	torment	for	but	a	single	midnight	hour.



I	abandoned	the	second	daily	letter	with	the	best	intentions,	in	the
belief	that	we	would	both	gain	more	peace	and	more	confidence.	This
twice-repeated	connecting,	and	twice-repeated	breaking-off	each	day,
was	 terrible	 for	me,	 and	 persecuted	 and	worried	me	 incessantly	 all
through	 the	morning	and	 then	again	all	 through	 the	afternoon.	This
futile	 striving	 for	 an	 impossibility—i.e.,	 your	 presence—must	 surely
dismay	not	 only	me,	 dearest,	 but	 you	 as	well	 each	 time	 it	 happens.
But	 you	may	 be	 right	 after	 all.	 Once	 a	 day	 I	 have	 to	write	 to	 you;
otherwise	I	would	rather	drop	everything,	otherwise	I	wouldn’t	know
what	to	do	with	myself—and	it	wouldn’t	bring	you	any	nearer;	but	if
only	it	would	make	you	feel	a	shade	calmer,	I	will	start	writing	twice
again.	It	doesn’t	matter	whether	I	am	in	the	mood	for	only	one	letter
to	you,	that	doesn’t	matter;	what	matters	is	whether	by	writing	twice
a	 day	 I	 could	 still	manage	 to	 summon,	 at	 least	 to	 some	 extent,	 the
energy	for	everything	else	that	is	expected	of	me.	Because	to	let	this
feeling	of	oneness	with	you,	which	 I	have	 in	my	 innermost	self,	 rise
and	hit	me	in	the	face	by	writing	twice	a	day—that	might	be	too	great
a	risk	at	this	sad	distance	at	which	I	have	to	live.
But	 now	 I	 must	 be	 off	 again;	 I	 have	 to	 go	 and	 help	Max	 with	 a
document	to	be	notarized.	Come	to	think	of	it,	it	was	today	that	you
had	to	swear	in	court	and	had	more	troubles.	Let	me	kiss	you,	dearest,
pale,	tormented	child!	He	who	signs	himself	below	belongs	to	you	not
like	an	object	in	your	room,	but	as	you	would	wish	it,	and	forever.

Yours,	Franz

Written	on	a	Workers’	Accident	Insurance	Institute	form	(List	objednávací)
and	enclosed:

Dearest,	 I	am	writing	on	this	paper	 that	happens	 to	be	near	at	hand
simply	 to	 relieve	 my	 worries	 about	 you	 for	 one	 moment.	 Please,
please	don’t	get	 into	such	a	 state,	nothing	good	can	come	of	 that.	 If
only	I	could	put	you	down	here	on	a	chair	beside	me,	hold	you,	and
look	 into	your	eyes.	There	 is	 something	of	 the	 lunatic	asylum	in	my
life.	 Innocent,	 and	certainly	guilty	as	well,	 I	 am	 locked	up,	not	 in	a
cell,	but	in	this	town;	I	call	out	to	the	dearest	of	girls,	want	her	to	be
calm	and	happy,	but	in	fact	I	call	out	only	to	walls	and	paper,	and	my
poor	girl	suffers.

Franz



From	December	20	to	21,	1912
I	 have	written	 nothing,	 dearest,	 for	 three	 evenings	 now,	 a	 bad	 start
before	 Christmas.	 And	 the	 Christmas	 vacation	 itself	 is	 becoming
uncertain,	 though	 owing	 to	 the	war	 scare113	my	 sister’s	wedding—I
don’t	think	I	have	told	you	this	before—has	been	postponed,	but	it	is
very	doubtful	whether	I	shall	be	able	to	take	the	two	days	off	as	I	had
hoped.	I	constantly	have	a	great	deal	to	do,	and	the	more	there	is	the
less	 I	 feel	 inclined,	or	rather,	 the	greater	becomes	my	reluctance.	As
long	as	I	am	in	the	office	myself,	this	desk	piled	high	with	arrears	can
be	defended,	though	only	by	bringing	into	action	the	ultimate	degree
of	personal	influence;	but	if	I	stay	at	home	my	desk	is	open	to	all,	and
during	the	day	incessant,	successive	little	explosions	of	arrears	would
be	 bound	 to	 take	 place,	 and	 that	 could	 be	 very	 unpleasant	 on	 my
return.	 Nevertheless—now	 that	 I	 am	 writing	 it	 all	 down,	 I	 find	 it
unbearable	 to	 waste	 those	 two	 days,	 for	 I	 should	 accomplish	 little
more	than	the	defense	of	my	desk,	and	so	I	shall	probably	decide	to
risk	it.
How	is	your	work	going,	my	girl?	(Today	I	have	a	feeling	that	you
are	 now	 calmer,	 more	 contented,	 and	 that	 your	 precious	 eyes	 once
again	 have	 that	 friendly	 yet	 commanding	 expression	 that	 struck	me
then	and	for	all	time.)	Is	it	possible	that	you	can	always	finish	all	your
work?	Don’t	some	letters	get	lost	in	the	shuffle	and	vanish	for	good?
Isn’t	 there	 a	 secret	 drawer	 where	 old,	 neglected	 things	 gather	 like
repulsive	animals?	Have	you	a	good	memory?	I	have	none,	and	work
entirely	on	 the	 seemingly	 inexhaustible	memory	of	my	chief,	who	 is
admirable	 in	 other	 ways,	 too.	 If	 ever	 he	 has	 actually	 forgotten
something	I	need,	I	start	coaxing	his	memory	with	indefinite	remarks
of	a	general	nature,	and	it	isn’t	long	before	he	remembers.	There	are
people	who	need	only	see	a	cooperative	face,	no	matter	how	helpless
the	person	whose	face	it	 is,	to	remember	everything	at	once.	I	could
never	 work	 as	 independently	 as	 you	 seem	 to;	 I	 slither	 out	 of
responsibility	 like	 a	 snake;	 I	 have	 to	 sign	 many	 things,	 but	 every
evaded	 signature	 seems	 like	 a	 gain;	 I	 also	 sign	 everything	 (though	 I
really	shouldn’t)	with	FK	only,	as	though	that	could	exonerate	me;	for
this	 reason	 I	 also	 feel	 drawn	 toward	 the	 typewriter	 in	 anything
concerning	 the	office,	because	 its	work,	especially	when	executed	at
the	hands	 of	 a	 typist,	 is	 so	 impersonal.	 This	 otherwise	 praiseworthy
caution,	 however,	 is	 complemented	 and	 cancelled	 by	 the	 fact	 that	 I
sign	even	the	most	important	things	with	the	said	FK,	without	reading



them,	and	that	owing	to	my	forgetfulness	anything	that	has	once	left
my	desk	has,	so	far	as	 I	am	concerned,	never	existed.	Would	all	 this
make	 me,	 who	 recently	 sought	 a	 position	 in	 your	 office,	 highly
commendable?
In	 today’s	 letter	 a	diary	 is	mentioned.	Does	 it	 still	 exist?	 Is	 it	 still

being	 kept?	 And	 these	words:	 “I	 love	 him	 and	 never,	whoever	may
cross	 my	 path	…”	 you	 wrote	 at	 the	 age	 of	 15?	 Dearest,	 had	 I	 but
known	you	then!	We	wouldn’t	be	so	far	apart,	 I	 think.	We	would	be
sitting	 at	 the	 same	 table,	 looking	 out	 of	 the	 same	window	 into	 the
street.	We	wouldn’t	be	trembling,	one	for	the	other;	there	would	be	no
impossibilities.	 But	 then	 again	 I	 say	 to	 myself,	 and	 this	 shows	 the
inevitability	 of	 it	 all:	 ten	 years	 ago,	 but	 also	 two,	 or	 even	 one	 year
ago,	 I	was	better	at	many	 things,	unfortunately,	but	 in	myself	 I	was
more	 insecure	 and	 more	 unhappy	 than	 today;	 so	 perhaps	 this	 was
after	all	the	right	moment	for	the	appearance	of	the	one	person	who
was	to	become	dearer	to	me	than	any	other	on	this	earth.
I	was	 looking	 for	 something	 today	on	my	desk	at	home	(this	desk

cannot	 be	 tidied	 either,	 one	 can	 but	 hunt	 for	 things	 in	 it;	 only	 one
drawer	 is	 tidy	 and	 locked,	 the	 one	with	 your	 letters),	when	 I	 came
across	 an	 old	 letter,	 dating	 back	 to	 that	 month’s	 waiting-time;	 it
belongs	to	you	and	so	I	am	sending	it,	in	spite	of	its	not	very	pleasant
condition.	 When	 I	 read	 it,	 unfortunately	 it	 is	 not	 dated,	 I	 see	 with
further	unreasonable	hopes	(there	is	so	much	I	write	against	my	will,
only	 because	 it	 is	 forced	 out	 of	 me;	 bad,	 miserable	 author!)	 that
everything	is	so	much	better	now,	and	that	one	might	think	the	lucky
star	that	has	been	our	guide	can	never	fade	from	over	us.	Child,	how
strangely	 you	write	 today!	 I	 desert	 the	 flag?	Which	 flag	would	 that
be?	 It	 could	 only	 be	 my	 life’s	 flag.	 And	 I	 could	 not	 do	 that
deliberately;	I	feel	too	much	in	the	midst	of	battle,	in	spite	of	all	my
misery.	So	it	won’t	happen	deliberately	and	by	my	own	hand.
And	now	farewell,	girl,	girl!	I	wish	you	a	pleasant	Sunday,	amiable

parents,	 delicious	 food,	 long	 walks,	 a	 clear	 head.	 Tomorrow	 I	 shall
start	to	write	again,	I	want	to	delve	into	it	with	all	my	strength;	when
not	writing	I	feel	myself	being	pushed	out	of	life	by	unyielding	hands.
And	perhaps	tomorrow	I	shall	have	a	more	cheerful	letter	than	today’s
but	an	equally	truthful	one:	for	considerateness	hurts	me	more	than	the
truth.

Franz



Enclosed:	the	undated	letter	“from	that	month’s	waiting-time”	of	September
28	to	October	23,	1912:
Dear	Fräulein	Bauer,
Allow	me	 to	write	 to	 you,	 even	 if	 a	 reply	 to	my	 last	 letter	 is	 still
very	 much	 in	 doubt;	 not	 writing	 makes	 my	 head	 ache,	 makes	 me
unsure	 of	 you	 and	 of	 myself.	 There	 is	 developing	 within	 me	 the
growing	habit	that	makes	it	a	duty	for	me	to	write	to	you;	how	could	I
free	myself	from	this	imperious	duty	simply	by	accepting	your	failure
to	answer?	There	was	a	night	when	I	wrote	letters	to	you	continuously
while	half-asleep,	it	felt	like	continuous	soft	hammering.

Franz	K.

December	21,	1912
A	supplement	from	the	present:	To	be	on	the	safe	side,	please	write	to
the	apartment	from	Sunday	on.	I	don’t	want	letters	sent	to	the	office
until	next	Friday.	And	where	do	you	want	your	letters	sent?

[PICTURE	POSTCARD]
December	21,	1912

Very	first	morning-greetings.	At	this	moment	I	am	getting	ready	for	an
immense	walk,	such	as	I	do	not	remember	taking	for	weeks.	Perhaps	it
will	last	as	long	as	one	hour.	If	so,	I	shall	make	an	effort	to	walk	once
up	and	down	this	Alchemists’	Lane,114	as	it	is	pictured	here.

FK

[TOP	RIGHT,	IN	 THE	 SPACE	PROVIDED	 FOR	THE	 STAMP]	Oh	dearest,	 it’s	no	good,	I	 just
can’t	send	this	open	postcard.	What	kind	of	a	night	would	it	be	if	on
its	eve	I	had	not	sent	you	kisses,	and	taken	some	for	myself?

Franz

December	22,	1912
Morning
Do	you	know,	dearest,	I	was	actually	overjoyed	by	the	story	about
Herr	Neble,	provided	it	was	the	only	reason	for	your	low	spirits	in	the
last	 few	 days.	 So	 that	 was	 all?	 Of	 course	 it	 may	 have	 been	 pretty



unpleasant.	But	that	you	would	emerge	triumphant,	I	could	have	told
you	in	advance;	I	envy	Director	Heinemann	his	wonderful	part,	which
I	 could	have	played	 even	better.	 “Just	 shut	 the	door,	 Frl.	 Bauer,”	 is
what	I	would	have	said	too.	And	then	you	would	have	had	to	tell	me
the	story,	 for	after	all	you	are	not	much	more	reticent	with	me	than
you	are	with	your	director;	why,	 I	 ask	myself,	was	 I	 not	 allowed	 to
hear	the	story	about	that	Neble	at	once	on	the	first	day?	And	if	I	were
your	 director,	 how	 I	 would	 have	 listened!	 Night	 would	 have	 come,
and	then	morning,	and	the	staff	would	have	arrived	 for	a	new	day’s
work,	and	in	answer	to	my	endless	questions	you	would	still	have	to
be	 talking	 endlessly.	 One	 thing	 I	 probably	 would	 not	 have	 done	 as
well	as	your	director:	at	 sight	of	your	 first	 tears	 I	might	possibly,	 in
spite	 of	 my	 customary	 tearlessness,	 have	 cried	 with	 you	 in	 a	 most
undirectorial	manner.	And	 to	preserve	my	dignity	 there	would	have
been	no	alternative	but	 to	 lay	my	cheek	against	yours,	 to	allow	our
tears	 to	 mingle	 indistinguishably.	 Dearest,	 dearest	 Felice!	 How	 you
are	made	to	suffer!
Do	you	 lose	your	 temper	easily?	 I	don’t	on	 the	whole,	but	when	I
do,	 I	 really	 feel	 closer	 to	 God	 than	 at	 other	 times.	When	 the	 blood
begins	 to	boil	all	at	once,	 from	head	 to	 foot,	 fists	 twitching	 in	one’s
pockets,	when	everything	 in	one	detaches	 itself	 from	all	 self-control,
and	 this	 very	 powerlessness	 to	 control	 oneself	 reveals	 itself—in
another,	indeed	the	true	sense—as	power,	then	one	realizes	that	anger
should	 be	 avoided	 only	 in	 its	 lowest	 beginnings.	 Only	 last	 night	 I
came	very	close	to	slapping	somebody’s	face,	and	not	with	one	hand,
but	 with	 both,	 and	 not	 just	 once,	 but	 repeatedly.	 In	 the	 end	 I
contented	myself	 with	 words,	 but	 they	 were	 strong.	 It	 is	 not	 at	 all
impossible	that	the	memory	of	Neble	contributed.

Afternoon
There,	my	dearest	Felice,	now	I	am	with	you	again.	Last	evening	when
I	had	returned	from	my	long	walk—I	had	meant	to	go	alone,	but	on
my	way	to	the	station	I	met	my	entire	family,	who	had	just	come	from
my	married	 sister’s,	 and	 the	 entreaties	 of	my	 youngest	 sister	 and	 a
cousin	were	so	persistent	I	had	to	take	them	along—when	I	got	home
from	this	walk	it	occurred	to	me,	and	I	couldn’t	get	it	out	of	my	head
for	 a	 long	 time,	 that	 you	may	 be	 angry	with	me	 on	 account	 of	my
overanxious	 second	 Saturday	 letter,	 or	 not	 really	 angry	 (after	 all,	 I
didn’t	write	anything	wrong),	but	disappointed	that	I	too	am	not	the
one	 to	 whom	 grievances	 can	 be	 aired	 without	 any	 consideration—



which	 is	 the	best	 and	most	 alleviating	way	of	 airing	 them—without
the	slightest	consideration	for	oneself	or	the	world	around	one.	And	I
was	not	altogether	wrong	to	be	apprehensive	last	night;	I	think	I	can
see	that	 from	your	express	 letter.	You	say,	 for	example:	“When	your
letter	 arrived	 with	 the	 10	 o’clock	 mail	 this	 morning,	 I	 was	 sadder,
more	 depressed	 than	 before.”	 A	 fine	 kind	 of	 lover	 is	 he	who	writes
that	sort	of	letter	to	his	beloved,	and	adds	to	her	suffering.	No,	listen
to	me,	dearest,	you	will	not	 leave	me,	you	have	said	so	many	times,
but	 I	want	 to	 be	 very	 close	 to	 you	 in	 every	 respect;	 don’t	withhold
from	me	 any	 part	 of	 you,	 not	 even	 your	 complaints.	 Stay	 with	 me
entirely,	dearest,	stay	for	me	as	you	are;	I	would	not	wish	a	single	hair
on	your	head	to	turn	any	way	other	than	it	does.	Don’t	try	to	be	gay	if
you	 are	 not.	 For	 cheerfulness,	 resolutions	 are	 not	 enough,	 cheerful
circumstances	are	needed	as	well.	I	won’t	find	you	any	more	attractive
if	you	look	better,	I	shall	only	find	you	as	attractive	as	I	do	now.	The
nearness	 I	 feel	 to	 you	 is	 too	 great	 for	 any	 change	 of	 moods,	 of
appearance,	 to	 have	 any	 effect	 on	my	 relationship	 with	 you.	 I	 will
only	be	unhappy	when	you	are	unhappy,	and	out	of	 love	 for	you	as
much	as	out	of	self-interest	I	will	attempt	to	remove	the	unhappiness.
There	won’t	be	any	other	noticeable	effect	of	unhappiness—with	the
exception	of	 these	 letters,	hastily	 scribbled	during	 the	day,	 in	which
one	 cannot	 rise	 above	 a	 momentary	 meaningless	 agitation,	 another
warning,	by	the	way,	against	twice-daily	writing.
And	 am	 I	 not	 complaining?	 It	 is	 almost	 a	 howl!	 Yesterday,	 for
example,	 I	 completely	collapsed	at	 the	office.	My	head	was	bursting
from	 lack	 of	 sleep	 (yet	 I	 have	 written	 nothing	 for	 nights	 on	 end,
except	to	you);	whatever	I	happened	to	lean	against,	there	I	remained,
leaning;	I	was	afraid	to	sit	down	in	my	armchair	for	fear	of	not	being
able	 to	 get	 up	 again;	 in	 order	 to	 keep	myself	 awake	 while	 reading
files,	I	held	the	lower	end	of	my	pen	against	my	temple—then	in	the
afternoon	 I	 slept	 a	 little,	 but	 didn’t	 feel	 any	 better	 in	 the	 evening,
which	is	why	I	went	for	that	walk,	but	then	again	slept	very	lightly,	as
though	on	watch.	If	we	cannot	use	arms,	dearest,	let	us	embrace	with
complaints.

Franz

December	22–23,	1912
Dearest,	I	am	in	a	state	of	considerable	confusion;	don’t	take	amiss	the



lack	of	clarity	in	anything	I	may	write.	I	am	writing	to	you	because	I
am	wholly	filled	with	you	and	must	 in	some	way	let	 it	be	known	to
the	 outside	world.	 I	 roamed	 around	 all	 Sunday	 in	 a	wretched	 state,
spent	most	of	the	time	with	people,	did	not	sleep	at	all,	unexpectedly
visited	friends,	unexpectedly	went	away	again;	I	have	not	felt	like	this
for	months.	It	is	because	I	have	not	done	any	writing	for	far	too	long
and	feel	somewhat	cut	off	from	it—i.e.,	in	a	void.	Added	to	which,	the
longed-for	Christmas	vacation	is	now	here,	and	I	am	about	to	waste	it
shamefully.	And	beneath	it	all	of	course	lurks	the	thought	that	I	could
be	 in	 Berlin,	 with	 you,	 in	 my	 safest	 refuge,	 and	 instead	 I	 stay	 in
Prague	as	though	afraid	I	might	otherwise	lose	my	ultimate	security,
and	as	though	you	were	actually	here	in	Prague.
Dearest,	when	I	got	home	yesterday	evening	in	this	pleasant	mood
and	 found	 your	 telegram	 on	 the	 table,	 you	 dearest,	 compassionate
heart,	 I	wasn’t	 at	 all	 scared,	 but	 knew	at	 once	 that	 it	 could	 contain
nothing	 but	 comfort,	 and	when	 it	 turned	 out	 to	 be	 so,	 I	 kissed	 this
alien	 paper,	 a	 long	 kiss	 with	 eyes	 closed,	 until	 this	 was	 no	 longer
enough	for	me,	and	I	pressed	it	flat	against	my	cheek.
Dearest,	you	would	certainly	never	guess	what	time	it	was	when	the
above	was	written.	 It	must	have	been	4.	Under	 the	 influence	of	 the
telegram	 I	 had	 gone	 to	 bed	 very	 early,	 before	 9	 (I	 handle	 myself
somewhat	capriciously),	woke	up	at	2,	and	awake,	with	my	eyes	open,
but	still	under	the	influence	of	sleep,	and	therefore	with	uninterrupted
and	rather	magical	visions,	I	thought	of	you,	and	of	a	possible	journey
to	 Berlin.	 Beautiful,	 easy	 connections	 were	 effected,	 without	 any
trouble,	motorcars	soared	like	lovers,	telephone	conversations	worked
as	 though	 one	 were	 holding	 hands	 at	 the	 time,	 I	 had	 better	 stop
thinking	about	it—the	more	awake	I	was,	the	more	restless	I	became,
then	got	out	of	bed	about	4,	did	my	exercises,	washed,	and	wrote	two
pages	 for	 myself,	 but	 felt	 too	 restless	 to	 go	 on,	 then	 wrote	 these
preceding	two	pages,	but	abandoned	them	as	well,	and	with	a	buzzing
head	went	 back	 to	 bed	where	 I	 stayed	 until	 9	 in	 the	morning	 in	 a
heavy	 sleep	 in	 which,	 by	 the	 way,	 you	 also	 appeared,	 for	 a	 brief
conversation	 with	 a	 friend’s	 family.—Of	 course	 this	 whole	 strange
way	of	 life	 is	due	 simply	 to	 the	 fact	 that	 in	 the	 first	place	 I	haven’t
written	 anything	 for	 some	 while,	 and	 in	 the	 second,	 my	 time	 is
practically	my	own,	without	my	yet	having	adjusted	myself	to	it.

Dearest	Felice!	Your	Franz

[OWING	TO	THE	SMALL	SPACE,	THE	TWO	NAMES	ARE	WRITTEN	CLOSE	TOGETHER:	KAFKA	ADDED	IN	THE



MARGIN]	Here	at	least	we	are	together.

On	a	separate	page,	enclosed:
[December	23,	1912]

Your	Saturday	night	letter	has	just	arrived.	I	won’t	answer	it	until	this
afternoon,	 otherwise	 you	 won’t	 get	 this	 letter	 at	 9.	Will	 everything
now	really	improve	as	much	as	your	letter	suggests?	May	God	grant	it.
The	fortitude	and	good	humor	of	your	letter,	by	the	way,	puts	me	to
shame,	but	I	shall	get	on	my	feet	again,	too.	Oh,	if	Frl.	Lindner	only
knew	how	difficult	it	is	to	write	as	little	as	I	do!
The	 other	 day	 you	 mentioned	 a	 bomb	 about	 to	 go	 off.	 Your
mother’s	arrival	prevented	you	from	writing	more.	What	happened	to
that	 bomb?—Let	 me	 tell	 you,	 dearest,	 with	 kisses	 rather	 than	 with
words,	how	much	I	love	you.

Franz

December	23,	1912
Dearest	 Felice,	 I	 have	 finally	 organized	 these	 two	 precious	 days	 in
such	a	way	that	I	go	to	the	office	for	a	little	while	in	the	morning	to
look	at	 the	mail,	 but	 for	 the	 rest	 I	 live	as	a	 free	man.	Saturday	and
Sunday,	 apart	 from	 writing	 briefly	 during	 the	 night,	 were	 frittered
away,	but	this	is	not	really	too	bad,	dearest.	Say	that	it’s	not	too	bad.
What’s	more,	I	am	gradually	beginning	to	savor	the	pleasures	of	this
life	 of	 ease,	 and	 yesterday’s	 and	 last	 night’s	 confusion	 is	 gradually
fading.	What	 do	 you	 say	 to	my	 idea	 of	 having	 yesterday’s	 telegram
framed	and	hanging	it	over	my	desk?	From	your	Saturday	night	letter
I	 now	 see	 that	 already	 on	 Saturday	 you	 had	 the	 idea	 of	 sending	 a
telegram,	 nevertheless—what	 was	 in	 your	 mind,	 dearest,	 when	 you
sent	 the	 telegram,	 since	 you	 could	 not	 possibly	 have	 foreseen	 the
significance	it	would	have	for	me,	especially	since	the	letter	you	got	in
the	 morning	 was—as	 far	 as	 I	 remember—relatively	 calm?	 And
besides,	originally	you	meant	to	send	the	telegram	in	the	morning;	but
had	it	arrived	in	the	morning,	I	would	only	(only!	only!)	have	taken	it
to	 be	 a	 token	 of	 your	 love	 and	 kindness,	 but	 in	 the	 evening	 (you
appear	to	have	sent	it	at	4)	it	virtually	raised	me	from	the	ground.	The
proximity	 of	 that	 kind	 of	 telegram	 is	 entirely	 different	 to	 the
remoteness	 from	 which	 letters	 slowly	 draw	 near.	 Now	 I	 also	 know



that	things	were	all	right	with	you,	hence	with	both	of	us,	until	4	in
the	afternoon,	even	if	no	Sunday	letter	has	arrived.	Perhaps	the	letter
arrived	 later	 at	 the	 office,	 it	wasn’t	 there	 in	 the	morning,	 anyway	 I
will	look	again,	perhaps	you	sent	it	to	the	wrong	address.	In	any	case	I
shall	send	tonight’s	letter	to	your	apartment.	Your	intentions,	dearest,
are	excellent,	and	if	you	keep	to	them	carefully,	I	shall	have	a	model
sweetheart.	But	you	have	to	be	that,	if	you	have	such	a	feckless	lover.
If	you	haven’t	got	pink	cheeks,	how	can	I	make	them	pale,	since	that
is	my	job?	If	you	are	not	lively,	how	can	I	make	you	tired;	if	you	are
not	gay,	how	can	I	depress	you?	Dearest,	my	dearest,	out	of	love	for
you,	only	out	of	love,	I	would	like	to	dance	with	you;	for	I	now	feel
that	 dancing,	 this	 embracing	 and	 turning	 at	 the	 same	 time,	 belongs
inseparably	 to	 love	 and	 is	 its	 true	 and	 crazy	 expression.	 Oh	 God,	 I
have	said	a	lot	in	this	letter,	but	my	head	is	just	as	full	of	love	as	of
things	to	tell	you.

Yours,	Franz

From	[December]	23	to	24,	[1912]
Dearest,	 what	 will	 happen	 when	 I	 cannot	 write	 any	 more?	 This
moment	 seems	 to	 have	 arrived;	 for	 a	 week	 or	 more	 I	 have
accomplished	nothing;	in	the	course	of	the	last	ten	nights	(admittedly
working	with	 frequent	 interruptions)	 I	was	 really	 carried	 away	only
once,	that	was	all.	I	am	permanently	tired,	my	craving	for	sleep	goes
around	and	around	in	my	head.	Tension	right	and	left	at	the	top	of	my
skull.	Yesterday	I	began	a	little	story	which	I	had	very	much	at	heart
and	which	appeared	to	open	up	before	me	at	one	stroke;115	today	it	is
completely	closed	up;	when	I	ask	what	will	happen,	I	am	not	thinking
of	myself,	I	have	lived	through	worse	times,	and	am	still	more	or	less
alive,	and	if	I	am	not	going	to	write	for	myself,	I	shall	have	more	time
to	write	 to	you,	 to	 enjoy	 the	nearness	of	 you,	 this	nearness	which	 I
have	 created	 by	 thinking,	 by	 writing,	 and	 by	 fighting	 with	 all	 the
strength	 of	my	 soul—but	 you,	 you	will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 love	me	 any
more.	Not	because	I	am	not	going	to	write	for	myself	any	more,	but
because	this	not	writing	will	turn	me	into	a	poorer,	more	unbalanced,
less	 secure	being,	whom	you	could	not	possibly	 like.	Dearest,	 if	you
make	poor	children	in	the	street	happy,	do	it	to	me	too,	I	am	no	less
poor;	you	have	no	idea	how	great	my	affinity	is	with	the	old	man	who
goes	home	 in	 the	evening	with	his	unsold	wares—so	do	unto	me	as



you	would	to	all	of	them,	even	if	your	mother	should	be	angry	about
this	 as	 she	 was	 about	 the	 others	 (everyone	 has	 to	 bear	 his	 burden
unconditionally;	 for	 parents	 it	 is	 the	 anger	 over	 their	 children’s
innocent	nature):	in	short,	tell	me	you	will	go	on	loving	me,	no	matter
how	 I	 behave	 go	 on	 loving	me	 at	 any	 price,	 there	 is	 no	 disgrace	 I
would	not	be	prepared	to	bear—but	where	is	this	leading	me?
These	are	the	rambling	thoughts	of	this	brain	on	holiday,	when	it	is
resting!	 In	 these	circumstances	haven’t	 I	every	reason	 to	stick	steadily	 to
the	 office,	 work	 like	 the	 wind	 through	 all	 arrears,	 and	 become	 a	 keen,
methodical	 official	whose	whole	 head	 is	 on	 the	 job?	 There	 remains	 the
argument	 that	perhaps	 I	 am	bewildered	by	 these	 first	 two	 free	days
and	 in	 my	 haste	 don’t	 know	 where	 to	 begin;	 after	 all,	 I	 don’t
remember	ever	having	had	a	better	Christmas	(tomorrow	I	shall	look
up	some	of	the	old	diaries	for	you)—but	this	whole	argument	is	not	to
be	taken	too	seriously.	Here,	as	elsewhere,	the	only	thing	that	counts
is	Either–Or.	Either	I	can	do	a	thing,	or	not,	and	this	time	the	matter
ends	with	the	“Or.”
As	 long	 as	 after	 the	 question	 “Do	 you	 love	 me,	 Felice?”	 the	 big
“Yeses”	 follow	 each	 other	 into	 eternity,	 everything	 else	 can	 be
conquered.

Franz

December	24,	1912
Yesterday,	Monday,	 I	had	only	your	Saturday	 letter;	 today,	Tuesday,
nothing	at	all.	How	can	I	make	the	best	of	that?	I	would	treasure	the
briefest	 postcard	 greeting!	 Dearest,	 don’t	 detect	 reproaches	 in	 this,
they	 are	 not	 there,	 but	 detect	 love,	 and	 love’s	 anxiety,	 of	 which
everything	I	write	is	full.	(Yesterday	evening	I	found	nothing	from	you
at	the	office.)

Franz

[December	24,	1912]
Since	at	 last	 I	have	written	a	 little	 for	myself,	 I	am	gaining	courage,
take	 your	 arm	 (I	 have	 never	 held	 anything	more	 tenderly	 than	 you
during	this	interrogation	that	is	to	follow),	and	ask	straight	into	your
beloved	 eyes:	 “Has	 there	 been,	 Felice,	 in	 the	 last	 three	 months,	 a
single	day	on	which	you	have	not	had	news	from	me?	You	see,	there



hasn’t	 been	 such	 a	 day.	 But	 today,	 Tuesday,	 you	 leave	 me	 entirely
without	news;	 since	4	o’clock	on	Sunday	 I	know	nothing	about	you;
until	tomorrow’s	delivery	that	will	be	no	less	than	66	hours,	filled	in
my	mind	with	every	alternating	good	and	bad	contingency.”	Dearest,
don’t	be	angry	with	me	for	this	idle	talk,	but	66	hours	really	is	a	long
time.	 I	 am	well	 aware	 of	 all	 that	 has	 prevented	 you:	 it’s	 Christmas,
you	have	visitors,	 the	mail	 is	unreliable	 (perhaps	even	my	 letter	did
not	arrive	punctually),	but	even	so—66	hours!	And	yet—there	is	one
more	thing	I	have	to	say	before	going	to	sleep—on	my	free	days	I	can
still	bear	the	absence	of	letters	comparatively	well—though	I	have	no
news	of	you,	I	am	free,	nothing	prevents	me	from	thinking	about	you
all	 the	 time,	 and	 be	 it	 only	 a	 one-sided	 contact,	 it	 extends	 almost,
almost	 to	 your	 room,	 so	 strong,	 so	 essential	 and	 absolute	 are	 the
forces	that	create	it.	Therefore,	dearest,	if	at	any	time	you	cannot	let
me	 have	 news	 of	 you,	 let	 it	 be	 a	 Sunday	 or	 a	 holiday	when	 I	 hear
nothing	of	you.	That	is	why	it	was	bearable	today;	it	was	not	nearly	as
bad	as	you	might	think,	judging	by	the	solemnity	of	the	early	part	of
this	 letter.	 The	 absence	 of	 eagerly	 awaited	 news	 is	 terrible	 only	 on
weekdays.	 For	 then	 it	 is	 forbidden	 to	 think	 about	 you,	 tiresome
demands	 are	 made	 upon	 me	 from	 all	 sides,	 a	 letter	 from	 you	 or	 a
postcard	gives	me	a	sense	of	security,	I	don’t	have	to	think	about	you,
I	need	only	put	my	hand	in	my	pocket	to	touch	the	paper	with	your
writing	 on	 it,	 to	 know	 you	 are	 thinking	 of	 me,	 that	 you	 are	 alive,
fortunately	 for	me.	 But	 if	 the	 pocket	 is	 empty,	 and	 the	 head—with
thoughts	of	nothing	but	you	racing	around	in	it—should	be	ready	for
office	 work,	 then	 a	 serious	 contrast	 is	 created,	 and	 believe	 me,
dearest,	 it	 is	 extremely	difficult	 to	deal	with.—Earlier	on,	 in	 the	old
days,	 when	 no	 letter	 arrived,	 I	 wrote:	 I	 shall	 not	 expect	 another,
everything	 will	 come	 to	 an	 end.	 Today	 I	 say:	 though	 letter	 writing
should	stop,	we	should	be	so	close	to	each	other	to	make	it	not	only
unnecessary	 to	write	 letters,	 but	 the	 excessive	 closeness	would	 even
make	it	impossible	to	speak.
Now	 I	 remember:	 today	 is	Holy	Night	 [Christmas	 Eve].	 For	me	 it
has	passed	in	an	unholy	fashion,	except	for	this	farewell	kiss.

Franz

[IN	THE	MARGIN]	From	Friday	on	I	will	be	back	at	the	office.
Wednesday,	December	25,	1912,	3	P.M.



I	am	writing	 these	 few	words,	dearest,	not	 to	write	 to	you—anyway
you	 are	 sure	 to	 get	 them	 at	 the	 same	 time	 as	 a	 later,	 more
comprehensive	 letter—but	 to	 feel	 again	 some	 contact	 with	 you,	 to
have	 actually	 done	 something	 to	 establish	 this	 contact,	 that’s	why	 I
am	writing.	I	upset	the	entire	Christmas	mail	by	furiously	demanding
my	letters	from	the	mailman;	I	was	on	the	stairs,	was	about	to	go	out,
all	hope	had	been	abandoned,	after	all	it	was	then	12:15	P.M.	At	last,
at	 last	 a	 wonderful	 mail,	 the	 start	 of	 the	 Christmas	 holidays,	 two
letters,	one	postcard,	one	picture,	flowers.	Dearest,	quite-wildly-to-be-
smothered-in-kisses	 dearest,	 how	 can	 I	 thank	 you	 with	 this	 feeble
hand?
Well,	now	I	am	going	for	a	walk	with	a	friend	whom	I	may	not	have
mentioned	before—Weltsch.116	 I	must	 hurry	 away,	 because	 relatives
with	 extremely	 penetrating	 voices	 have	 just	 arrived,	 the	 whole
apartment	 is	 shaking;	 I	 shall	 escape	 unseen,	 unheard,	 through	 the
hall.	If	only	it	were	with	you!	For	your	sake	I	would	even	slacken	my
pace	down	the	stairs;	for	I	am	in	the	habit—it	is	the	only	sport	(by	the
way,	self-invented)	that	I	indulge	in—of	racing	downstairs,	a	terror	to
all	who	are	coming	up.	The	weather	is	lovely;	may	you,	dearest,	have
a	good	 rest;	 I	 enjoy	every	moment	of	 these	Christmas	days	 twice	as
much	when	I	remember	that	you	are	able	to	rest	and	recover.	So	no
writing,	but	a	telegram,	if	that’s	possible.	This	nightly	turning	off	the
light,	which	your	mother	practices,	is	very	much	to	my	liking;	if	she
knew,	she	would	probably	leave	the	light	on;	on	the	other	hand,	that
again	would	be	to	my	liking.

Franz

I	hope	you	were	handed	the	2	 letters	 I	wrote	 to	 the	apartment?
They	were	letters	particularly	unsuitable,	I	think,	for	the	eyes	of
others.

From	December	25	to	26,	1912
The	novel	has	gone	ahead	a	little,	I	am	sticking	to	it,	since	my	story
has	rejected	me.	From	the	start	of	the	story	I	made	too	many	demands
upon	myself;	 at	 the	 very	 beginning	 four	 characters	 are	 supposed	 to
talk	and	be	vigorously	involved	in	everything.	But	I	can	fully	visualize
as	 many	 characters	 as	 that	 only	 when	 they	 come	 into	 being	 and
develop	 in	 the	 course,	 and	 from	 the	 flow,	 of	 the	 story.	Right	 at	 the



beginning	 I	 unfortunately	mastered	 only	 two,	 but	 if	 four	 people	 are
pressing	forward,	trying	to	take	the	floor,	and	the	writer	has	eyes	only
for	two,	the	result	is	a	sad,	an	almost	social	embarrassment.	These	two
refuse	to	be	unmasked.	But	because	my	eyes	stray	all	over	the	place,
they	might	catch	some	shadows	of	these	two,	but	then	the	two	solid
characters,	 being	 temporarily	 abandoned,	 become	 uncertain,	 and
finally	it	all	collapses.	A	pity!
But	now	I	am	really	too	tired;	owing	to	all	kinds	of	interruptions	I
have	not	slept	at	all	during	the	day;	I	sleep	far	more	on	working	days.
I	 have	much	 to	 tell	 you,	 but	 now	my	 exhaustion	has	 turned	off	 the
main	tap.	If	only,	instead	of	writing	my	novel,	I	had	written	to	you,	as
I	 very	 much	 wanted	 to!	 I	 was	 so	 eager	 to	 start	 the	 letter	 and	 so
prepare	for	my	writing	by	covering	the	paper	with	kisses,	because	 it
will	be	held	by	you.	But	now	I	am	tired	and	dull,	and	more	than	your
kisses	I	should	need	that	lively	look	of	yours,	which	can	be	detected	in
today’s	photograph.	Today	I	shall	tell	you	only	what	I	object	to	in	that
picture:	Your	eyes	refuse	to	meet	mine,	they	always	ignore	me;	I	turn
the	picture	this	way	and	that,	you	invariably	manage	to	look	the	other
way,	calmly	and	as	though	deliberately	to	look	the	other	way.	On	the
other	hand	 I	have	 the	opportunity	of	 pulling	 the	whole	 face	 toward
me	by	kissing	it,	which	I	do,	and	shall	do	again	 just	before	going	to
sleep,	and	shall	do	again	when	I	wake	up.	 If	 it	 is	worth	mentioning,
my	 lips	 are	 entirely	 yours,	 I	 kiss	 no	 one	 else,	 neither	 parents,	 nor
sisters,	and	implacable	aunts	find	a	spot	only	on	a	reluctant	cheek.

December	26,	1912,	Thursday	morning
At	last	I	have	a	picture	of	you,	as	you	were	when	I	saw	you—not,	of
course,	as	I	first	saw	you	(without	a	jacket,	with	head	bare,	unframed
by	any	hat),	but	as	you	were	when	I	 lost	you	 in	 the	doorway	of	 the
hotel,	as	you	were	when	I	walked	beside	you	along	the	Graben,	when
I	felt	no	affinity	with	you,	yet	longed	only	for	the	closest	affinity.	I’ve
just	 thought	 of	 something:	 isn’t	 it	 a	 habit	 of	 yours	 to	 keep	 pushing
your	hair	off	your	forehead,	especially	when	you	are	holding	a	picture
and	 want	 to	 look	 down	 at	 it?	 Does	 my	 memory	 betray	 me?	 For	 I
sometimes	 see	 you	 that	way.	 The	 hat	 is	 there	 too,	 the	 underside	 of
which	I,	in	my	blindness,	took	to	be	white.	But	the	blouse	must	be	a
different	one,	 the	Prague	blouse	surely	was	white.	 I	have	 just	kissed
you,	 whereupon	 your	 smile	 was	 a	 trifle	 more	 friendly	 than	 before.
What	 have	 you	 to	 say,	 dearest,	 dearest	 child,	 to	 your	 picture’s



behavior?	For	the	next	few	days	at	 least	I	shan’t	carry	the	little	case
and	the	picture	in	my	pocket,	but	in	my	fist,	as	a	prop,	protection,	and
strengthener.	It	would	be	strange	indeed	if	the	owner	of	a	picture	such
as	this	could	not	hold	his	own	in	every	way.	And	you,	dearest,	are	you
somewhat	rested	yet?	Don’t	your	relatives	make	you	run	around	too
much?	 You	 wouldn’t	 have	 had	 time	 for	 me	 even	 if	 I	 had	 come	 to
Berlin.	But	what	am	I	saying?	Is	this	the	way	to	put	an	end	to	my	self-
reproaches?	After	all,	wasn’t	 I	 right	not	 to	have	gone	 to	Berlin?	But
when	will	I	ever	see	you	again?	This	summer?	But	why	this	summer,
if	I	didn’t	see	you	at	Christmas?	It	is	a	sunny	morning	just	now,	I	have
had	a	reasonable	amount	of	sleep,	yet	I	feel	more	insecure	than	in	the
depths	of	night.	I	have	a	lot	to	say	about	your	mother,	but	I	will	leave
it	for	my	next	letter.	The	pleasure	I	derive	from	devouring	everything
you	write	about	your	mother’s	remarks	concerning	me	is	strange.	To
some	extent	it	is	the	pleasure	of	being	attacked	with	such	hostility	(if
with	the	best	intentions)	and	so	powerfully	and	charmingly	defended.
But	 that	 doesn’t	 altogether	 explain	 this	 pleasure.	 I	 want	 to	 be
mentioned	all	the	time	within	your	family.	What	a	paradoxical	desire!
But	 now	 it	 is	 nearly	 noon.	 Up,	 up!	 Adieu,	 Felice!	 Picture	 into	 its
case!	Letter	into	envelope,	and	away	to	the	station	to	mail	it!

Franz

I	am	enclosing	my	last	sanatorium’s117	Christmas	greetings,	they
arrived	 at	 the	 same	 time	 as	 your	 picture.	 Just	 see	 with	 what
devilish	deceit	I	wanted	some	alien	faith	to	cure	me.	But	it	didn’t
help	much,	either.

On	an	enclosed	slip	of	paper:
Have	 just	 thought	 of	 another	 urgent	 matter:	 Surely,	 dearest,	 you
didn’t	make	a	present	to	your	sister	of	the	blouse	you	wore	that	time
in	Prague?

From	December	26	to	27,	1912
That	little	case	you	sent	me	is	a	magic	case.	It	is	making	a	different,
calmer,	 better	 man	 of	 me.	 The	 possibility	 of	 looking	 at	 the	 picture
wherever	I	happen	to	be,	or	at	least	of	pulling	out	the	little	case	(the
notion	of	carrying	it	constantly	in	my	hand	has	not	proved	successful),
is	again	a	new	delight,	which	I	owe	to	you.	Whenever	I	look	at	your



picture—it	 is	 standing	 in	 front	of	me	now—I	marvel	 at	 the	 strength
which	 binds	 us	 together;	 at	 how,	 beyond	 all	 this	 which	 is	 visible,
beyond	 the	 charming	 face,	 the	 calm	 eyes,	 the	 smile,	 the	 (actually
narrow)	 shoulders,	which	 should	 promptly	 be	 hugged—how	beyond
all	this,	forces	so	close,	so	indispensable	to	me,	are	at	work;	I	marvel
at	the	mystery	of	it	all—a	mystery	which	an	insignificant	person	like
me	shouldn’t	look	at,	he	should	simply	immerse	himself	in	it.
But	I	am	so	engrossed	in	the	picture	I	don’t	get	a	chance	to	continue
this	letter—something	you	never	considered,	dearest,	when	giving	the
present.	 I	 think	 it	 will	 help	 me	 in	 every	 way;	 tomorrow	 I	 shall	 do
better	in	that	ghastly	office,	I	shall	pluck	out	of	my	pile	of	files,	if	only
with	 the	 tips	 of	 my	 fingers,	 some	 of	 the	 oldest	 neglected	 papers;	 I
have	also	decided,	which	is	not	inconsiderable,	that	come	what	may	I
shall	 never	 start	writing	 after	 10	 P.M.	 and	 never	 stay	 up	 (unless	 the
next	 day	 is	 a	 holiday)	 after	 2	 A.M.;	 finally	 (all	 this,	 to	 make	myself
worthy	of	your	present)	I	bitterly	regret	the	letter	you	received	on	the
2nd	 Christmas	 holiday;118	 rebuke	 me	 in	 the	 letter	 that	 is	 due
tomorrow,	 a	 letter	 I	 am	 looking	 forward	 to	with	 fear	 and	 pleasure;
yes,	rebuke	me	with	all	your	might	in	that	letter;	he	who	reproaches
his	beloved	for	no	reason,	and	disrupts	her	morning	sleep	with	stupid
talk	 on	 a	 holiday,	 deserves	 not	 only	 to	 be	 scolded,	 he	 deserves	 (to
mention	something	very	unpleasant,	almost	unbearable),	he	deserves
to	get	no	letter	for	two	whole	days.	So	don’t	worry,	dearest,	I	won’t	be
so	 faint-hearted	 again;	 forgive	me;	 all	 the	misery	 I	 inflict	 upon	 you
stems	 from	 one	 source:	 my	 love	 for	 you.	 If	 at	 times	 I	 hurt	 your
feelings	without	 realizing	 it,	 then	keep	 looking	 for	 the	 reason	 in	my
love,	and	there,	on	some	confounded	path	(that’s	just	the	way	I	am),
you	are	sure	to	find	it.	Once	again	I	have	told	you	nothing,	nothing,
not	even	how	I	have	spent	my	days.	Well,	your	picture	knows	it	all.
Should	 you	pass	 by	 the	photographer’s,	 tell	 him	 that	 not	 one	 of	 his
pictures	will	be	kissed	as	often	as	this	one.

Franz

Night	of	December	27	to	28,	1912
My	 dearest,	 if	 the	 little	 case,	 for	 which	 I	 am	 indebted	 to	 you,	 can
stand	the	immense	demands	I	put	upon	it	for	any	length	of	time,	then
it	 is	 a	 good	 little	 case.	 There	 are	 times	 when	 my	 longing	 for	 you
overwhelms	 me.	 The	 case	 is	 ripped	 open,	 and	 in	 a	 friendly	 and



charming	 manner	 you	 at	 once	 present	 yourself	 to	 my	 insatiable
scrutiny.	 In	 the	 light	 of	 street	 lamps,	 outside	 illuminated	 shop
windows,	 at	 my	 desk	 in	 the	 office,	 at	 a	 sudden	 standstill	 in	 the
corridors,	beside	a	drowsy	typist,	by	the	window	in	the	 living	room,
while	a	large	gathering	of	friends	and	relatives	fills	the	room	behind
me—dearest,	 dearest,	 I	 cannot	 always	 articulate	 even	 this	 one	 short
word	when	 thinking	about	you,	 for	 so	often	 I	 can	 think	of	you	only
with	 teeth	 clenched.	 And	 because	 this	 little	 photograph	 is	 so
inexhaustible,	 it	 actually	produces	as	much	pleasure	as	pain.	 It	does
not	 fade	away,	 it	does	not	disintegrate	 like	a	 living	 thing;	 instead	 it
will	survive	forever,	a	permanent	comfort;	it	cannot	altogether	satisfy
me,	but	it	won’t	leave	me,	either.
Of	course	I	said	to	myself	at	once	(from	self-interest!	from	cunning!
from	presence	 of	mind!):	 now	 that	 the	miraculous	 effect	 of	 pictures
has	been	established,	you	too	must	certainly	have	a	picture	of	me.	 I
hastened	at	once	to	the	photographer	to	get	him	to	take	a	picture	of
identical	 size,	 but	 our	 high-speed	 photographers	 are	 slower	 than
yours;	it	won’t	be	ready	for	a	week.	I	was	seized	moreover	with	such
greed	 by	 your	 idea,	 dearest,	 that	 I	 propose	 a	 monthly	 exchange	 of
these	 little	 pictures.	 Your	 appearance	must	 surely	 alter,	 the	 seasons
advance,	 you	 wear	 different	 clothes—no,	 dearest,	 I	 am	 asking	 too
much,	I’m	going	too	far.	I	must	be	content	to	possess	this	picture	for
which	I	should	thank	you	again	in	every	letter.
Your	Thursday	 letter,	 the	one	 that	 stopped	abruptly	 after	 the	 first
five	 words,	 looks	 quite	 frightening	 at	 first	 glance,	 as	 though	 some
malevolent	and	mighty	hand	had	seized	your	hands,	or	had	inflicted
on	you	 even	worse	 things.	Well,	 I	 say	 to	myself,	 you	 still	 addressed
the	envelope,	enclosed	the	newspaper	clippings,	perhaps	even	mailed
the	letter,	so	nothing	very	serious	can	have	happened,	and	tomorrow	I
can	expect	a	letter	again.
I	 don’t	 quite	 understand	 your	 mother	 behaving	 so	 tyrannically
toward	you;	whereas	in	every	other	way	I	understand	her	so	well.	By
supporting	 yourself	 don’t	 you	 occupy	 a	 special	 position	 at	 home,
above	all	vis-à-vis	your	sister	who	as	far	as	I	know	only	helps	with	the
household?	 And	 does	 no	 one	 respect	 this	 exceptional	 position	 of
yours?	While	your	mother	appears	to	be	committing	a	grave	injustice
by	underestimating	your	work,	she	is	right	in	everything	else.	She	was
right	 in	 the	 seaside	 resort	when	 she	 refused	 to	 leave	 your	 side	 (Ah,
what	was	the	young	man	up	to?	Away	with	him!);	she	is	right	to	be
angry	about	my	letters	(perhaps	even	about	this	one,	though	it	gives



her	her	due);	only	in	a	dream,	if	then,	could	I	see	myself	convincing
her	of	the	necessity	of	these	letters,	and	after	all	she	is	right—and	how
right	 she	 is!—if	 she	 considers	 any	 way	 of	 life	 other	 than	 marriage
between	man	and	woman	to	be	futile.	For	instance,	have	I	not	often
declared	myself	to	be	futile?
You	enclose	 the	Berliner	 Tageblatt’s	 inquiry	without	 any	 comment,
which	was	quite	right!	What	abysmally	stupid	questions	they	ask!	In
this	way	the	paper	takes	on	a	kind	of	human,	if	idiotic,	character.	All
answers	that	fail	to	make	the	stupidity	of	the	question	clear	are	bad,
since	they	just	don’t	correspond	to	the	questions.	Yet	these	questions
are	so	easy	to	answer	that	I	shall	immediately	answer	them	both:	“He”
certainly	has	to	be	good-looking.	“She,”	on	the	other	hand,	has	to	be
no	more	and	no	less	than	precisely	what	she	is.119
If	 she	 is	 precisely	 what	 she	 is,	 one	 cannot	 part	 from	 her	 in	 the
depths	of	night	and	would	want	to	go	on	and	on	writing	to	her	in	the
futile	hope	of	thereby	making	her	come	to	life	before	one’s	eyes.	You
must	 have	 received	 [Max	 Brod’s]	 Intensity	 of	 Feeling	 by	 now.	 The
explanation	 for	 the	 two	 different	 handwritings	 in	 the	 dedication	 is
that	this	book	is	one	of	20	copies	of	the	de	luxe	edition,	each	of	which
had	Max’s	signature	in	it	from	the	start.	But	this	looked	bleak,	and	so,
to	be	honest,	I	asked	him	to	add	to	it.
Today	I	got	a	letter	from	Löwy;	I	am	enclosing	it	so	that	you	can	see
the	way	he	writes.	 I	 found	his	address—without	 letting	you	know—
some	 time	 ago,	 and	 have	 also	 had	 several	 letters	 from	 him	 in	 the
meantime.	They	are	all	much	the	same,	and	full	of	complaints;	there
is	no	help	for	the	poor	man;	now	for	no	reason	he	keeps	going	back
and	forth	between	Leipzig	and	Berlin.	In	the	past	his	letters	were	quite
different,	far	more	lively	and	optimistic;	perhaps	he	has	really	reached
the	end.	You	thought	he	was	Czech;	no,	he	is	Russian.
Adieu,	 dearest,	 whatever	 happens,	 we’ll	 go	 on	 loving	 each	 other,
won’t	we?	Where	are	your	lips?

Franz

From	December	28	to	29,	1912
My	dearest	child,	highly	instructive	things	are	happening	in	my	novel
just	 now.	Have	 you	 ever	 seen	 the	demonstrations	 that	 take	place	 in
American	towns	on	the	eve	of	a	judge’s	election?	I’m	sure	you	haven’t,
any	more	 than	 I	 have,	 but	 in	my	novel	 these	 demonstrations	 are	 in



full	swing.120
Only	a	few	words	for	now,	my	dearest,	it’s	nearly	2	o’clock,	and	for
the	past	week	I	invariably	get	a	buzzing	in	the	head	if	I	go	to	bed	after
2.	Could	it	be	that	instead	of	my	getting	used	to	these	nightly	vigils,	I
can	bear	 them	 less	 and	 less?	My	yawning	at	 the	office	 is	downright
disgraceful;	I	yawn	at	the	directors,	at	my	chief,	the	clients,	in	short	at
anyone	who	happens	to	get	in	my	way.	But	I	am	hoping	my	2	o’clock
bedtime	will	help	to	cure	my	weakness.
Dearest,	shall	I	tell	you	what	a	pitiful	creature	I	am?	Would	it	not
be	 better	 to	 hide	 it	 from	you,	 so	 as	 not	 to	 prejudice	myself	 in	 your
eyes?	But	don’t	I	have	to	tell	you,	since	we	belong	together,	as	close
together	 as	 is	 possible	with	 time	 and	 space	 as	 our	 enemies?	 In	 that
case,	I	have	to	tell	you.
Your	 second	 letter	 today	 made	 me	 jealous.	 You	 are	 amazed	 and
think	you	have	not	read	rightly?	Yes,	 jealous.	All	 letters	 in	which	as
many	people	are	mentioned	as	for	example	in	today’s	letter	make	me
helplessly	 jealous.	 I	 remember	now,	 it	was	 also	 a	 letter	 of	 this	 kind
that	produced	 that	mounting	 frenzy,	 followed	by	 that	horrible	 letter
which	forever	will	leave	me	in	your	debt.	Yes,	I	am	jealous	of	all	the
people	in	your	letter,	those	named	and	those	unnamed,	men	and	girls,
business	people	and	writers	(writers	above	all,	needless	to	say).	I	am
jealous	of	your	Warsaw	representative	(or	perhaps	“jealous”	is	not	the
right	word,	perhaps	I	am	only	“envious”);	I	am	jealous	of	the	people
who	 offer	 you	 better	 jobs,	 I	 am	 jealous	 of	 Frl.	 Lindner	 (Brühl	 and
Grossmann	are	 little	 girls,	 you	are	 allowed	 them—reluctantly);	 I	 am
jealous	 of	 Werfel,	 Sophocles,	 Ricarda	 Huch,121	 Lagerlöf,122
Jacobsen.123	 My	 jealousy	 is	 childishly	 pleased	 because	 you	 call
Eulenberg	 Hermann	 instead	 of	 Herbert,	 while	 Franz	 no	 doubt	 is
deeply	 engraved	 on	 your	 brain.	 (You	 like	 the	 Silhouettes?	 You	 find
them	pithy	and	clear?)	“Mozart”	is	the	only	one	I	know	in	its	entirety,
Eulenberg	 (no,	 he’s	 not	 from	 Prague,	 he’s	 from	 the	 Rhine)	 gave	 a
reading	of	 it	here,	but	 I	 could	hardly	bear	 it,	 the	breathless	unclean
prose.	But	his	plays	are	said	to	be	charming,	I	don’t	know	them.	Yes,
now	I	remember	reading	one	of	his	works	in	Pan—good	in	many	ways
—I	 think	 it	was	 called	 “Letter	 from	 a	 Father	 to	His	 Son.”124	 But	 of
course	there	is	no	doubt	that	in	my	present	condition	I	am	doing	him
a	grave	injustice.	But	you	ought	not	to	read	the	Silhouettes.	And	now	I
see	that	you	are	even	“very	enthusiastic”	about	him.	(Listen	everyone:
Felice	 is	 very	 enthusiastic	 about	 him,	 very	 enthusiastic	 indeed,	 and
here	 am	 I	 raging	against	him	 in	 the	middle	of	 the	night.)	But	other



people	are	 to	be	 found	 in	your	 letter	as	well;	 I	want	 to	 start	a	 fight
with	 them	 all,	 the	 whole	 lot,	 not	 because	 I	 mean	 to	 do	 them	 any
harm,	but	to	drive	them	away	from	you,	to	get	you	away	from	them,
to	 read	only	 letters	 that	are	concerned	solely	with	you,	your	 family,
and	the	two	little	ones,	and	of	course,	of	course,	me!	But	dearest,	I	am
not	quite	mad,	I	want	to	hear	about	everything,	my	insistent	love	has
invaded	you	too	deeply	for	me	to	be	truly	and	basically	jealous	(if	you
read	 the	 Silhouettes	 I	 am	 convinced	 we	 shall	 eventually	 share	 the
dislike	on	my	part,	and	the	enthusiasm	on	your	part—i.e.,	 I	 shall	be
enthusiastic	 about	 the	 one	 copy	 you	 happen	 to	 hold	 in	 your	 hands,
that’s	all),	but—to	make	you	know	me	completely—I	only	wanted	to
describe	 the	 impression	 your	 letter	 made	 upon	 me	 this	 afternoon,
admittedly	the	time	when	I	am	at	a	low	ebb.
In	fact	I	received	the	letter	when	I	got	back	from	the	office,	it	had
actually	arrived	by	the	11	o’clock	mail.	This	seems	to	do	credit	to	the
Austrian	postal	service.	But	just	think—so	capricious	is	our	mail—the
letter	 was	 delivered	 not	 to	 our	 house	 but	 to	 my	 parents’	 business
address,	more	than	half	a	mile	away.	This	doesn’t	matter	in	the	least
as	such,	for	my	mail	is	not	scrutinized,	and	the	letter	was	immediately
taken	from	the	shop	to	the	apartment—but	it	should	be	proof	that	my
inconsiderate	 anxiety,	 sometimes	 so	upsetting	 to	you,	 can	almost	be
excused	by	such	capricious	deliveries.
What	also	contributed	to	the	afternoon’s	depression	was	that	I	said
to	 myself:	 I	 have	 had	 two	 letters	 today,	 that’s	 wonderful,	 but	 who
knows	whether	I	shall	get	another	tomorrow,	Sunday.	It	seems	to	me
Felice	assumed	that	this	letter	would	not	arrive	until	Sunday,	but	now
it’s	already	here,	so	tomorrow	perhaps	I	shall	be	left	sitting,	or	rather
writhing	in	my	bed,	without	news.	May	this	not	be	so!
But	 then	 I	came	 to	 the	 sentence:	 “Now	I	easily	 surpass	you	 in	 the
writing	of	 long	 letters,”	 and	 that	 finished	me	off.	 I	 repeat:	 I	 am	not
crazy;	even	a	fool	would	know	that	this	remark	was	quite	irrelevant,
and	 was	 dropped	 quite	 fortuitously.	 But	 believe	 me,	 Felice	 (I	 must
almost	 have	 been	 in	 a	 trance	 when	 I	 read	 it),	 at	 that	 moment	 I
thought	 it	 meant	 goodbye;	 I	 had	 not	 written	 enough,	 that’s	 why	 it
would	 end.	 Dearest,	 but	 now	 I	 hug	 you	 tighter	 than	 ever	 to	 make
completely	sure	of	you	again	after	this	morbid	sensitivity	that	gnaws
at	me	from	time	to	time.
What’s	 more,	 these	 moods—undoubtedly	 due	 only	 to	 separation
and	 perhaps	 some	 constitutional	 defect	 on	 my	 part—did	 not	 end
there,	but	were	summed	up	in	a	dream	I	had	in	the	afternoon,	about



which	I	will	tell	you	tomorrow	(though	by	then	a	lot	will	have	been
forgotten).	 But	 now	 goodnight,	 dearest,	 and	 a	 long,	 calm,	 confident
kiss.

Franz

[December	29,	1912]
My	 dearest	 benefactress,	 so	 there	 was	 another	 letter	 after	 all,	 and
what	a	 letter,	wonderful	beyond	all	measure.	When	 the	bell	 rang	at
10:30—it	 could	 hardly	 have	 been	 anyone	 but	 the	mailman—I	 stood
behind	 the	 glass	 door	 in	 my	 room	 and	 tried	 to	 console	 myself	 in
advance:	“There	can’t	be	a	letter,”	I	said	to	myself,	“how	could	there
be	another	letter	today,	Felice	really	can’t	write	herself	sick.	You	will
definitely	have	to	be	patient	until	tomorrow.”	And	truly	I	trembled	in
my	plight.
Dearest,	once	again	this	is	the	kind	of	letter	that	makes	one	go	hot

with	silent	joy.	It	is	not	full	of	all	those	friends	and	writers,	there——
just	there	I	was	interrupted;	that	was	this	afternoon,	and	now	it	 is

so	late	I	daren’t	even	look;	I	shall	creep	out	of	the	locked	house	to	the
station	(ah,	 if	my	father	and	my	relatives	knew,	I	haven’t	seen	them
since	the	morning)	and	mail	this	scrap	of	paper.	For	my	own	peace	of
mind	I	can’t	let	you	be	without	Sunday’s	news	on	Monday.	I	am	fairly
well,	except	that	I	have	been	robbed	of	my	time;	how	could	I	not	be
well	as	long	as	you	love	me.	But	now	I	must	run!

Franz

From	December	29	to	30,	1912
Dearest,	 this	 was	 a	 bad	 Sunday.	 As	 though	 anticipating	 its
disturbances,	 I	 lay	 in	 bed	 endlessly	 this	morning,	 although	 I	 should
have	gone	somewhere	in	connection	with	the	factory,	which	(though
invisible	 to	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 world)	 makes	 me	 worry	 and	 feel
conscience-stricken.	 By	 this	 futile	 lying	 in	 bed	 (your	 letter	 didn’t
arrive	until	11),	everything	else	was	delayed;	and	when	after	lunch—
which	didn’t	start	till	2:30—I	began	my	letter	to	you,	happy	at	being
able	 to	 linger	 with	 you	 for	 a	 while,	 quietly	 in	 the	 quiet	 apartment
(owing	to	general	afternoon	sleep),	I	was	rung	up	by	that	Dr.	Weltsch
who	is	not	 just	a	casual	acquaintance,	but	a	real	 friend	of	mine.	His
name,	by	 the	way,	 is	Felix,	and	 I	am	glad	 to	have	been	on	 terms	of



friendship	with	 that	name	 for	 so	 long;	now	of	 course	 this	name	has
dissolved	its	 last	 letters	and	taken	on	a	profound	meaning.	So	it	was
this	Felix	who	rang	me	up	while	I	was	writing	to	Felice,	and	reminded
me	of	an	appointment	to	go	for	a	walk	with	him,	his	sister,	and	a	girl
friend	(needless	to	say,	his	sister’s),	just	as	I	had	done	last	Thursday.
And	 though	 I	 didn’t	 enjoy	 it	 last	 Thursday	 (from	 time	 to	 time	 and
most	 of	 the	 time	 I	 am	 afraid	 of	 girls),	 and	 though	 I	 had	 only	 just
started	 that	 absorbing	 letter,	 and	 though	 I	 also	 had	 an	 appointment
with	Max,	and	though	I	had	every	reason	to	fear	that	after	the	walk	I
wouldn’t	 have	 the	 necessary	 time	 for	 sleep,	 I	 accepted	 immediately
and	 eagerly	 because,	 confronted	 by	 the	 telephone,	 if	 only	 a	 house
telephone,	I	am	helpless;	and	anyway,	I	didn’t	want	to	keep	the	girls
waiting.	 But	 when	 I	 got	 downstairs	 and,	 irritated	 by	 all	 my
misgivings,	 came	 face	 to	 face	 with	 people	 instead	 of	 that	 dreadful
telephone,	 and	 found,	 besides	 the	 three,	 another	 girl	 and	 a	 young
man,	 I	quickly	made	up	my	mind,	accompanied	 them	only	as	 far	as
the	bridge,	and	took	my	leave,	thereby	disrupting	the	traffic	near	the
Toll	House125	and	treading	on	the	toes	of	a	woman	behind	me.	With
relief	I	then	hurried	to	Max.	But	now	that’s	enough	about	this	Sunday,
for	it	has	led	to	the	sad	result	that	I	can	write	no	more	today	since	it	is
already	long	past	11,	and	the	tension	and	twitchings	in	my	head	are
of	 a	 kind	 unknown	 to	me	 until	 this	week.	 Not	 to	write,	 and	 yet	 to
have	an	urge,	an	urge,	a	screaming	urge	to	write!
By	the	way,	now	I	know	more	precisely	why	yesterday’s	letter	made
me	so	jealous:	You	don’t	like	my	book	[Meditation]	any	more	than	you
liked	my	photograph.	This	really	wouldn’t	matter,	for	what	is	written
there	 is	 largely	old	stuff,	but	nevertheless	still	a	part	of	me,	hence	a
part	of	me	unknown	to	you.	But	this	wouldn’t	matter	at	all,	I	feel	your
presence	so	acutely	in	everything	else	that	I	should	be	quite	prepared
—provided	you	are	very	close	to	me—to	be	the	first	to	kick	the	little
book	aside	with	my	 foot.	 If	you	love	me	in	the	present,	 the	past	can
abide	where	it	will,	if	necessary	as	far	removed	as	fears	for	the	future.
But	why	don’t	you	tell	me,	tell	me	in	two	words,	that	you	don’t	like	it!
—You	 wouldn’t	 have	 to	 say	 you	 don’t	 like	 it	 (which	 probably
wouldn’t	be	true	anyway),	but	simply	that	you	can’t	make	head	or	tail
of	it.	It	really	is	full	of	hopeless	confusion,	or	rather	there	are	glimpses
into	 endless	 perplexities,	 and	 one	 has	 to	 come	 very	 close	 to	 see
anything	at	all.	And	so	it	would	be	quite	understandable	if	you	did	not
like	 the	 book,	 but	 hope	 would	 remain	 that	 at	 some	 favorable	 and
weak	moment	it	might	yet	entice	you.	In	any	case,	no	one	will	know



what	to	make	of	it,	that	is	and	was	perfectly	clear	to	me;	the	trouble
the	 spendthrift	 publisher	 took	 and	 the	 money	 he	 lost,	 both	 utterly
wasted,	 prey	 on	my	mind	 too.	 Its	 publication	 came	 about	 quite	 by
chance,	 perhaps	 I	 will	 tell	 you	 about	 it	 some	 time;	 it	 would	 never
have	occurred	 to	me	on	my	own.	 I	am	telling	you	all	 this	 simply	 to
make	 it	 clear	 to	 you	 that	 an	 uncertain	 opinion	 on	 your	 part	would
have	seemed	quite	natural	to	me.	But	you	said	nothing,	or	rather	you
did	once	announce	that	something	would	be	said,	but	did	not	say	it.	It
is	the	same	as	it	was	with	Neble,	of	whom	you	would	not	let	me	hear
for	a	 long	time.	Dearest,	 look,	 I	do	want	to	feel	 that	you	turn	to	me
with	everything;	nothing,	not	 the	slightest	 thing	should	be	withheld,
for	we	 belong—or	 so	 I	 thought—together;	 I	may	 not	 like	 a	 favorite
blouse	of	yours	as	such,	but	because	you	are	wearing	it,	I	will	like	it;
you	don’t	like	my	book	as	such,	but	insofar	as	it	is	I	who	wrote	it	you
will	surely	like	it—well,	then	one	should	say	so,	and	say	both.
Dearest,	 I	 am	 sure	 you	 are	 not	 angry	with	me	 on	 account	 of	 this
long	 lecture,	 for	 of	 the	 two	 of	 us,	 it	 is	 you	 who	 are	 clarity,	 and	 it
seems	to	me	that	all	the	clarity	I	possess	I	learned	that	August	evening
from	your	eyes.	That	I	didn’t	learn	all	that	much,	you	can	see	from	the
dream	I	had	yesterday.
No,	 I	won’t	describe	 it	now,	 for	 I	have	 just	 remembered	 that	you,
dearest,	 are	 suffering,	 at	 least	 were	 suffering	 on	 Friday	 evening.	 So
that’s	what	is	worrying	you	at	home?	I	had	no	idea	about	that	either,
but	this	must	be	the	fault	of	my	own	denseness.	Poor	dearest	child,	to
get	drawn	into	this	kind	of	 thing	as	well,	 that’s	 terrible!	 It’s	not	 like
that	here;	my	mother	is	my	father’s	devoted	slave,	and	my	father	her
devoted	 tyrant,	 which	 is	 fundamentally	 why	 there	 has	 always	 been
perfect	harmony,	and	the	sorrows	we	have	all	shared,	particularly	in
the	last	few	years,	are	due	entirely	to	my	father’s	ill	health;	he	suffers
from	hardening	of	 the	 arteries,	 but	because	of	 the	 existing	harmony
this	could	not	really	touch	the	innermost	core	of	the	family.
At	this	very	moment	my	father	next	door	 is	 turning	over	violently
in	bed.	He	is	a	big,	strong	man;	fortunately	he	has	been	feeling	better
recently,	 but	 his	 illness	 is	 an	 ever-threatening	 one.	 The	 family’s
harmony	is	really	upset	only	by	me,	and	more	so	as	the	years	go	by;
very	 often	 I	 don’t	 know	what	 to	 do,	 and	 feel	 a	 great	 sense	 of	 guilt
toward	my	 parents	 and	 everyone	 else.	 Thus	 I	 too	 have	my	 share	 of
suffering,	 my	 dearest	 distant	 girl,	 within	 and	 through	 my	 family,
except	that	I	deserve	it	more	than	you.	On	more	than	one	occasion	in
the	past,	I	have	stood	by	the	window	at	night	playing	with	the	catch,



feeling	it	almost	my	duty	to	open	the	window	and	throw	myself	out.
But	that	is	long	past,	and	now	the	knowledge	of	your	love	has	made
me	a	more	confident	person	than	I	have	ever	been	before.
Goodnight,	 dearest,	 sad	 kisses	 are	 comforting	 too,	 and	 sadness
makes	 the	 lips	 linger	endlessly	upon	the	other’s,	not	wanting	to	 tear
themselves	away.

Franz

Dearest,	 once	 again:	 I	 am	 going	 to	write	 regularly	 only	 once	 a
day,	my	fitful	 letters	during	the	day	make	me	unhappy,	and	the
feeling	that	you	might	even	once	expect	a	letter	at	10	o’clock	in
vain	burns	me	up.	So	expect	no	letter,	dearest,	ignore	the	sad	glances
from	 Frl	 Brühl,	whom	 by	 the	way	 I	 should	 like	 to	 thank,	 but	 don’t
know	how	to.
Are	you	going	to	the	office	on	New	Year’s	Day?	Please	write	to
me	at	home.	I	too	will	write	to	you	at	home.
[IN	THE	MARGIN]	What’s	the	joke	about	the	Berliner	Tageblatt?	What
was	it	you	had	to	forgive	me	for?	Precise	explanation!

Night	of	December	30	to	31,	1912
At	last,	dearest,	you	tell	me	about	a	walk	you	took,	and	I	am	happy.
Isn’t	this	the	first	hour	for	months	spent	in	the	open?	Are	you	really
quite	 well	 leading	 that	 nerve-racking	 life?	 I	 am	 strangely	 calm	 just
now,	 and	 it	 does	 not	 seem	 to	 be	 only	 tiredness.	 But	 this	 morning
before	 your	 second	 letter	 arrived	 I	 was	 in	 a	 kind	 of	 turmoil.	 For
absolutely	no	apparent	 reason.	 It	 is	 just	 this:	 one	writes	 and	 for	 the
time	being	feels	close,	imagines	one	is	holding	on	to	the	other	but	in
fact	 one	 is	 only	 groping	 in	 the	 air,	 and	 as	 a	 result	 one	 is	 bound
occasionally	to	fall.	But	dearest,	we	won’t	leave	each	other,	will	we?
And	 should	 one	 of	 us	 fall,	 the	 other	 will	 pick	 him	 up.	 Your	 letter
makes	this	Frl.	Lindner	sound	like	my	tribunal;	although	she	has	not
yet	written	 to	me,	 I	 am	 very	much	 aware	 of	 her	 reproach.	Dearest,
you	have	proved	your	love	with	long	letters,	now	prove	it	with	short
ones.	Don’t	write	by	candlelight	when	the	electric	light	is	turned	off;
the	 thought	 of	 it	 takes	 my	 breath	 away	 with	 worry.	 Now	 you	 are
helping	with	the	household	too;	you	are	suffering	from	your	parents,
crying	 about	 your	 sister	 in	 Budapest—if	 only	 I	 could	 be	 with	 you
entirely,	and	these	worries	were	at	all	times	our	worries,	then	I	would



feel	 better.	 But	 here	 I	 sit	 all	 alone	 (the	 clock	 is	 still	 ticking	 far	 too
loudly	in	my	coat	pocket,	I	hide	it	there	on	account	of	its	loud	strike),
racking	 my	 brains	 for	 some	 means	 by	 which	 you	 and	 I	 could	 be
helped.
Just	why	does	a	letter	from	your	sister	reduce	you	to	tears?	What	is
wrong	with	 her?	 Is	 she	 homesick?	 Just	 homesick?	But	 she’s	 got	 her
husband,	and	the	child.	And	 in	Budapest	German	is	spoken	by	some
100,000	people,	and	in	two	years	she	must	surely	have	learned	a	little
Hungarian.	Isn’t	her	husband	with	her?	Perhaps	he	travels	a	lot?	What
is	 the	main	 cause	 of	 her	 unhappiness	 and	 your	 compassion?	 And	 it
occurs	to	me	that	she	may	even	have	been	in	Budapest	for	more	than
2	years,	and	still	hasn’t	got	used	to	it?	And	she	has	the	child	as	well;
where	is	there	room	for	pity?
You	 said	 it	 yourself	 in	 your	 typing	 room	 to	 those	 peculiar	 ladies.
And	 I—though	 fully	 aware	 of	 condemning	myself—would	 not	 have
expressed	it	any	other	way,	for	these	words	are	always	on	the	tip	of
my	tongue,	and	I	repeat	 them	more	often	than	 is	good	for	me.	Only
last	Sunday	afternoon	Max	said	to	me	on	a	similar	occasion:	“You	talk
like	a	girl.”	But	this	is	not	quite	true,	for	in	an	excellent	collection	of
Napoleon’s	sayings,126	which	for	some	time	now	I	have	been	dipping
into	whenever	 I	 can,	 these	words	 are	 recorded:	 “It	 is	 terrible	 to	 die
childless,”	 and	 he	 was	 by	 no	 means	 sorry	 for	 himself;	 friends,	 for
instance,	 whether	 by	 choice	 or	 necessity,	 were	 not	 indispensable	 to
him.	He	once	said:	“I	haven’t	a	friend	other	than	Daru,	who	is	callous
and	 cold	 and	 suits	me.”	 And	 to	 judge	 the	 true	 depth	 this	man	 had
access	to,	take	this	remark:	“He	who	knows	from	the	beginning	where
he	 is	going,	will	not	get	 far.”	So	 that	when	he	 talks	of	 the	 terror	of
childlessness,	one	may	believe	him.	And	I	have	to	be	prepared	to	take
this	upon	myself,	 for	 apart	 from	everything	 else	 I	would	never	dare
expose	myself	to	the	risk	of	being	a	father.
I	don’t	know	why	it	is	that	for	the	last	few	days	all	my	letters	seem
to	 end	 in	 sadness.	 These	 spells	 come	 and	 go,	 and	 I	 beg	 you	 on	my
knees	not	to	be	angry	about	it.	Also	I’ve	remembered	too	late	that	this
letter	 will	 arrive	 on	 New	 Year’s	 morning,	 and	 will	 usher	 in	 a	 New
Year	 that	 should	be	wholly	ours.	For	 this	purpose	 I	have	 invented	a
new	 bond	 between	 us.	 I	 am	 going	 to	 buy	 a	 calendar	 with	 a	 lovely
picture	 for	each	day,	and	every	morning	 in	my	 letter	 I	 shall	 enclose
the	 page	with	 the	 date	 of	 the	 letter’s	 arrival	 and	 have	 it	 placed	 on
your	desk.	Although	as	a	result	I	myself	shall	be	a	trifle	ahead	of	time,
and	 calendar-wise	will	 actually	 have	 lived	 through	 the	 day	 you	 are



about	 to	 live	 through,	 we	 shall	 nevertheless	 live	 facing	 the	 same
calendar	page,	and	this	will	make	my	life	seem	sweeter.
Where	 will	 you	 be	 on	 New	 Year’s	 Eve?	 Dancing?	 Drinking
champagne?	 (In	 the	 afternoon	 you	 drank	 wine	 in	 Grunewald?127
Surely	 not?)	 I	wanted	 to	 stay	 at	my	desk	 and	 go	 on	with	my	novel
(which	today	is	still	suffering	from	yesterday’s	interruption),	but	now
I	 have	 had	 an	 invitation	 from	 people	 I	 am	 very	 fond	 of	 (that	 Dr.
Weltsch’s	uncle’s	 family),	 so	 I	am	in	 two	minds	about	what	 I	 should
do;	in	the	end	I	shall	stay	at	home	I	think,	even	though—since	I	have
had	 your	 little	 case—I	 am	 now	 capable	 of	 appearing	 at	 any	 social
function	(hand	in	pocket,	case	in	hand).	But	the	loss	of	time	would	be
too	 bad,	 I	 would	 regret	 it,	 and	moreover	 unfamiliar	 twitchings	 and
muscular	 contortions	 in	 my	 head	 warn	 me	 against	 excessively	 long
night	vigils.
Now,	dearest,	 adieu,	a	happy	New	Year	 to	my	dearest	girl;	 a	new
year	must	 be	 a	different	 year,	 and	 if	 the	 old	 one	has	 kept	us	 apart,
perhaps	the	new	year,	with	miraculous	forces,	will	throw	us	together.
Throw,	throw,	New	Year!

Franz

From	December	31,	1912,	to	January	1,	1913
While	I	was	still	 lying	in	bed	this	evening	at	8,	not	tired,	not	rested,
but	incapable	of	getting	up,	depressed	by	this	general	New	Year’s	Eve
celebration	that	was	beginning	all	around;	while	I	lay	there	sadly,	like
a	 lost	 dog,	 the	 two	 possibilities	 I	 had	 of	 spending	 the	 evening	with
good	friends	(just	now	the	midnight	cannon	went	off,	shouting	in	the
streets	and	on	the	bridge,	where	I	don’t	really	see	anyone,	ringing	of
bells,	 striking	 of	 clocks)	made	me	 feel	 so	much	more	 desperate	 and
withdrawn	that	I	felt	the	proper	task	for	my	gaze	was	the	scanning	of
my	bedroom	ceiling,	and	then	it	occurred	to	me	how	glad	I	ought	to
be	that	misfortune	decrees	I	cannot	be	with	you.	I	would	have	to	pay
too	dearly	for	the	joy	of	seeing	you,	the	joy	of	our	first	conversation,
the	joy	of	hiding	my	face	in	your	lap—for	all	this	I	would	have	to	pay
too	dearly,	you	would	run	away	from	me,	no	doubt	run	away	crying,
for	you	are	kindness	 itself;	 that	 is	how	 I	would	pay	 for	 it,	 but	what
good	would	the	tears	do	me?	And	would	I	have	the	right	to	run	after
you?	Would	I,	I	who	am	devoted	to	you	like	no	other,	have	the	right
to	do	it?	(How	they	roar	in	the	streets,	even	in	this	district	so	far	from



any	main	 thoroughfare!)	But	 I	need	not	 answer	all	 this	myself;	 you,
dearest,	 you	 answer—but	 do	 so	 after	 very	 careful	 consideration,
leaving	no	room	for	doubt.	 I	am	starting	with	 the	most	 trivial,	most
insignificant	questions;	as	time	passes	I	shall	intensify	them.
Let	us	assume	that	by	some	special	 stroke	of	 luck	 it	were	possible

for	 us	 to	 spend	 some	 days	 together	 in	 the	 same	 town—Frankfurt
perhaps.	 On	 the	 second	 evening	 we	 have	 arranged	 to	 go	 to	 the
theater,	and	I	am	supposed	to	fetch	you	from	the	exhibition.	Hastily
and	 with	 the	 greatest	 difficulty	 you	 have	 disposed	 of	 important
matters	to	make	quite	sure	of	being	on	time,	and	now	you	are	waiting
for	me.	You	wait	in	vain,	I	don’t	arrive;	a	purely	accidental	delay	can
no	 longer	 be	 assumed,	 the	 time	 limit	 conceded	 even	 by	 the	 most
amiable	person	is	long	past.	Nor	do	you	receive	a	message	that	might
explain;	meanwhile	you	could	have	disposed	of	your	business	matters
with	the	greatest	care,	would	have	had	time	to	change;	in	any	case	it
will	 now	 be	 too	 late	 for	 the	 theater.	 You	 can’t	 imagine	 that	 it	 was
sheer	 neglect	 on	 my	 part;	 perhaps	 you	 are	 a	 little	 worried	 that
something	may	have	happened	to	me,	and	on	the	spur	of	the	moment
—I	 can	 hear	 you	 giving	 the	 driver	 his	 instructions—you	 go	 to	 my
hotel	and	get	them	to	show	you	to	my	room.	And	what	do	you	find?	I
am	still	lying	(I	am	now	copying	the	first	page	of	this	letter)	in	bed	at
8,	not	tired,	not	rested;	I	maintain	that	I	had	been	incapable	of	leaving
my	 bed,	 complain	 about	 everything	 and	 insinuate	 even	 worse
complaints;	 I	 try	 to	make	amends	 for	 the	 terrible	wrong	by	 stroking
your	hand,	by	 seeking	your	eyes,	 lost	 in	 the	dark	 room,	and	yet	my
whole	behavior	 shows	 that	 I	 am	quite	prepared	 to	 repeat	 the	whole
thing	 at	 any	moment.	 Although	 I	 am	 at	 a	 loss	 to	 explain	myself	 in
words,	 I	 am	aware	of	 our	 situation	 in	 every	detail,	 and	 if	 I	were	 in
your	 place,	 standing	 at	my	 bedside,	 I	wouldn’t	 hesitate	 to	 raise	my
umbrella	and	in	my	anger	and	despair	break	it	over	my	head.
Don’t	forget,	dearest:	the	incident	I	have	just	described	is	absolutely

impossible	 in	 reality.	 In	 Frankfurt,	 for	 instance,	 if	 my	 continuous
presence	in	the	exhibition	halls	were	prohibited,	I	would	simply	spend
all	 day	 squatting	 outside	 the	 entrance	 to	 the	 exhibition,	 and	 when
visiting	 the	 theater	 together	 I	 would	 probably	 behave	 in	 a	 similar
fashion—in	other	words,	be	overattentive	rather	than	negligent.	But	I
want	 a	 more	 than	 plain	 answer	 to	 my	 question,	 an	 answer	 that	 is
absolutely	 independent	 from	 every	 point	 of	 view,	 even	 from	 that	 of
reality,	 and	 that’s	 why	 I	 have	 put	 my	 question	 in	 more	 than	 plain
terms.	So	answer,	dearest	pupil,	answer	your	teacher	who	at	times	in



the	 immensity	of	his	 love	 and	his	unhappiness	would	 like	 to	 vanish
utterly	into	unreality.
In	your	last	letter	there	is	a	sentence	you	have	written	once	before,
and	so	have	I:	“We	belong	together	unconditionally.”	That,	dearest,	is
true	a	thousandfold;	now,	for	instance,	in	these	first	hours	of	the	New
Year	I	could	have	no	greater	and	no	crazier	wish	than	that	we	should
be	bound	together	inseparably	by	the	wrists	of	your	left	and	my	right
hand.	 I	 don’t	 quite	 know	 why	 this	 should	 occur	 to	 me;	 perhaps
because	 a	 book	 on	 the	 French	 Revolution,	 with	 contemporary
accounts,	is	lying	in	front	of	me,	and	it	may	be	possible	after	all—not
that	 I	have	 read	or	heard	of	 it	 anywhere—that	a	 couple	 thus	bound
together	 were	 once	 led	 to	 the	 scaffold.—But	 what	 is	 all	 this	 that’s
racing	through	my	head	which,	by	the	way,	has	remained	completely
closed	to	my	poor	novel	today?	That’s	the	13	in	the	new	year’s	date.
But	 the	 finest	 13	 won’t	 prevent	me	 from	 drawing	 you,	my	 dearest,
closer,	 closer,	 closer	 to	 me.	 Where	 are	 you	 at	 this	 moment?	 From
whose	company	am	I	drawing	you	away?

Franz

December	[January]	1,	1912	[1913]
Dearest,	just	a	few	words	on	New	Year’s	afternoon.	Do	you	know	my
greatest	worry	at	the	moment?	I	didn’t	get	your	long	wonderful	letter
intended	 for	 yesterday,	 Tuesday,	 until	 the	 second	 mail	 today,
Wednesday.	Now	you	write:	“But	you	are	sure	to	get	yet	another	letter
on	 Sunday	 morning,”	 and	 when	 you	 say	 Sunday	 you	 clearly	 mean
today,	New	Year’s	Day.	All	right,	but	I	did	not	get	that	second	letter,	it
wasn’t	at	the	office	either.	So	it	will	probably	arrive	at	the	apartment
tomorrow	while	I	am	at	the	office.	Well,	I	will	leave	instructions	for	it
to	 be	 brought	 to	 the	 office	 at	 once,	 but	 will	 they	 forget,	 will	 it	 be
brought	in	time,	will	yet	another	letter	arrive	at	the	office?	So	there,
dearest,	these	are	my	worries.	Damn	the	mail!	Damn	the	distance!
But	 how	well	 you	 treat	me	 in	 today’s	 letter!	How	good	of	 you	 to
forgive	me,	and	how	well	you	understand	my	worries!	But	 for	 this	 I
will	thank	you	properly	tonight.	Dearest,	adieu,	I	have	an	attack	of	my
great,	heavy,	idiotic	afternoon-head	with	a	slight	twitching	above	the
left	eye,	and	in	this	condition	I	have	to	go	and	meet	people.	But	why
not?	 I	 shall	 still	 be	 good	 enough	 for	 them,	 for	 even	 when	 I	 am
relatively	at	my	best,	I	still	don’t	belong	to	them.



Eulenberg’s	 dismissal	 pleases	me	 enormously,	 and	 the	man	 hasn’t
the	slightest	inkling	about	it;	instead,	he	is	pleased	about	his	Schiller
Prize1	and	the	12,000	marks	which,	according	to	Werfel,	he	receives
annually	from	Rowohlt.	I	don’t	begrudge	him	this	in	any	way,	because
I	 have	 drawn	 you,	 Felice,	 over	 to	my	 side.	 But	 now	 you	must	 stay
there!

Franz

January	2,	1913
But	this	is	quite	incomprehensible	to	me,	dearest;	I	was	just	about	to
get	into	bed	when	your	telegram	arrived.	What	is	the	Berlin	mail	up
to?	On	New	Year’s	Day	you	got	a	letter	at	home,	didn’t	you?	All	right,
on	New	Year’s	Eve	I	wrote	you	a	gigantic	letter	and	mailed	it	on	the
morning	 of	 New	 Year’s	 Day;	 it	 should	 arrive	 today,	 the	 2nd,	 at	 9
o’clock.	And	then,	in	my	joy	over	your	letter,	I	wrote	another	during
the	 afternoon	 of	 New	 Year’s	 Day	 and	 mailed	 it	 at	 once;	 that	 one
should	 arrive	 today	 at	 10	o’clock.	 Finally	 last	 night	 I	wrote	 another
letter	which	should	arrive	tomorrow,	the	3rd,	at	9.	You	see,	dearest,	I
am	in	no	way	to	blame.	My	mail	is	quite	crazy	too;	your	letters	of	the
30th	and	 the	31st	didn’t	 arrive	 till	 today,	 the	2nd;	 your	New	Year’s
Eve	postcard	on	the	other	hand	arrived	punctually	at	the	office.	Why
are	we	persecuted	in	this	way?	Are	we	so	superlatively	happy	in	every
other	way?	I	must	hurry	now	to	mail	this	letter	express.

Franz

From	January	2	to	3,	1913
Very	late,	my	poor,	persecuted	dearest.	After	not	too	bad	but	far	too
brief	a	spell	of	work,	I	sat	leaning	back	in	my	chair	again	for	a	long
time,	and	now	it	has	become	very	late.
I	 don’t	 know,	 I	 can’t	 take	 the	 nonarrival	 of	 my	 letters	 so	 very
seriously,	even	though	your	telegram	is	here	before	me,	which	makes
me	long	to	race	to	Berlin	and	explain	the	matter	quickly	and	by	word
of	mouth.	But	the	 letters	must	surely	have	arrived	during	the	course
of	the	afternoon.	How	is	it	possible	that	two	letters,	no	doubt	correctly
addressed,	 furnished	moreover	with	 the	 sender’s	 name	 and	 address,
and	in	spite	of	being	conveyed	in	different	mailbags,	could	be	lost	on
the	same	day?	This	is	quite	beyond	me.	If	in	fact	it	has	happened,	one



can	 no	 longer	 be	 sure	 of	 anything,	 all	 letters	 will	 start	 getting	 lost
again,	 including	 this	 one,	 and	 only	 a	 telegram	 will	 reach	 its
destination.	And	then	we	will	have	but	one	way	out:	throw	away	our
pens	and	hurry	toward	each	other.
Dearest,	 whatever	 happens	 I	 implore	 you,	 with	 hands	 raised	 in
supplication,	not	to	be	jealous	of	my	novel.	If	the	people	in	my	novel
get	wind	of	your	jealousy,	they	will	run	away	from	me;	as	it	is,	I	am
holding	on	to	them	only	by	the	ends	of	their	sleeves.	And	imagine,	if
they	run	away	from	me	I	shall	have	to	run	after	them,	even	as	far	as
the	underworld,	where	of	course	they	really	are	at	home.	The	novel	is
me,	my	stories	are	me—where,	 I	ask	you,	would	there	be	the	tiniest
corner	 for	 jealousy?	 In	any	case,	when	everything	else	goes	well,	all
my	 characters	 come	 running	 arm	 in	 arm	 toward	 you,	 ultimately	 to
serve	you	alone.	 I	would	certainly	not	detach	myself	 from	my	novel
even	in	your	presence;	it	wouldn’t	do	me	any	good	if	I	could,	for	it	is
through	writing	that	I	keep	a	hold	on	life,	keep	a	hold	on	that	boat	in
which	you,	Felice,	are	standing.2	Sad	enough	that	I	don’t	seem	quite
able	to	pull	myself	in.	But	bear	in	mind,	dearest	Felice,	once	I	lose	my
writing,	I	am	bound	to	lose	you	and	everything	else.
Don’t	worry	about	my	book	[Meditation];	all	that	talk	the	other	day
was	a	sad	evening’s	sad	mood.3	At	the	time	I	thought	the	best	way	of
making	my	book	agreeable	to	you	was	to	level	some	silly	reproaches
against	you.	Do	read	it	quietly	some	time.	After	all,	how	can	it	remain
alien	to	you!	Even	if	you	were	to	shrink	from	it,	it	should	draw	you	to
itself,	provided	it	is	my	able	envoy.

Franz

[IN	THE	MARGINS]	I	don’t	really	know	which	of	the	letters	is	supposed	to	be
lost,	 the	 one	 about	 Napoleon	 and	 the	 children,	 or	 the	 one	 about
Frankfurt?
Woe	to	you,	dearest,	should	you	ever	get	up	at	night	to	write,	woe	to
you!
With	which	of	your	colleagues	did	you	hurry	home	on	the	30th?
A	 question	 of	 jealousy:	 What	 does	 your	 father	 have	 to	 say	 about
[Brod’s]	Arnold	Beer?

From	January	3	to	4,	1913



I	 know,	 dearest,	 I	 ought	 not	 to	 have	 stopped	writing	 yet,	 I	 know	 I
have	stopped	too	soon;	 it	 is	barely	past	1	o’clock,	but	my	reluctance
was	a	fraction	greater	than	my	inclination,	albeit	the	inclination	was
great,	albeit	it	was	weakness	rather	than	reluctance,	and	so	I	gave	up.
Please,	dearest,	when	you	have	read	this,	give	me	a	nod,	to	prove	that
I	did	the	right	thing,	and	then	it	will	have	been	the	right	thing	to	have
done.
I	 believe	we	 barter	 our	 anxieties.	 Today	 I	was	 the	 anxious	 one.	 I
would	have	 liked	 to	know	whether	you	 finally	got	my	 letters.	There
were	moments	 today	when	 I	 thought	 I	wouldn’t	be	able	 to	bear	 the
next	moment	unless	it	brought	you	to	me.	Late	last	night,	after	I	had
written	 and	 sealed	 the	 last	 letter,	 it	 occurred	 to	me	 in	 bed	 that	 the
whole	business	of	my	undelivered	letters	can	only	be	explained	by	the
fact	that	one	of	your	little	office	ladies	hid	the	letters,	out	of	curiosity
and	 lewdness,	 and	 failed	 to	 hand	 them	 to	 you	 until	 the	 evening.	 I
wonder	if	I	have	guessed	right.
Your	 bet	 for	 a	 bottle	 of	 champagne	 amazed	 me.	 Because	 I	 too,
though	years	ago,	and	as	far	as	I	remember	for	a	period	of	ten	years,
made	a	similar	bet	with	a	friend	concerning	my	marriage.	I	even	gave
him	a	written	pledge,	which	he	still	holds.	I	never	would	have	thought
of	 it	 if	 this	 friend,	 just	 recently—after	 not	 having	 mentioned	 it	 for
years—hadn’t	 chanced	 to	 remind	me	of	 it.	 It	was	 also	 a	question	of
champagne,	 but	unless	 I	 am	mistaken,	 10	bottles	 of	 the	 very	best.	 I
probably	thought	at	the	time	that	10	years	hence	I	would	organize	a
pleasant	 bachelor	 evening,	 hoping	 that	 with	 the	 years	 I	 might	 also
acquire	 a	 taste	 for	 champagne,	 something	 which	 so	 far	 has	 not
happened.	The	bet	originated,	as	you	will	have	guessed,	 in	those	far
off,	 so-called	 gadabout	 days,	 when	 I	 spent	 many	 a	 night	 sitting	 in
taverns,	without	drinking.	Judging	by	the	names,	they	were	wonderful
places:	Trocadero,	Eldorado,	and	so	 forth.	And	now?	Now	at	night	 I
stand	 on	 the	 street	 of	 an	 American	 town	 pouring	 strange	 beverages
into	myself,	as	into	a	barrel.4
You	still	want	me	to	tell	you	that	old	dream?	Why	particularly	the
old	 one	when	 I	 dream	about	 you	 almost	 every	 night?	 Just	 imagine,
last	 night	 I	 celebrated	 my	 engagement	 to	 you.	 It	 looked	 terribly,
terribly	 improbable,	 and	 I	 no	 longer	 remember	much	 about	 it.	 The
whole	party	sat	in	a	room	in	semidarkness	at	a	long	wooden	table,	its
black	top	not	covered	by	any	kind	of	cloth.	I	sat	at	the	lower	end	of
the	 table	 between	 strangers;	 you	were	 standing	 up,	 rather	 far	 away
from	me	further	up,	diagonally	opposite	me.	My	longing	for	you	made



me	 lay	 my	 head	 on	 the	 table	 and	 peer	 across	 at	 you.	 Your	 eyes,
directed	 toward	me,	were	 dark,	 but	 in	 the	 center	 of	 each	 eye	 there
was	 a	 spot	 that	 shone	 like	 fire	 and	 gold.	 Then	 my	 dream	 became
diffused;	 I	 noticed	 how	 the	 servant	 girl	 behind	 the	 guests’	 backs
sampled	the	semiliquid	dish	she	was	to	hand	around	in	a	small	brown
pot,	and	put	the	spoon	back	into	the	dish.	This	sent	me	into	an	awful
rage,	and	I	 led	the	girl—it	now	turned	out	that	the	whole	scene	was
taking	 place	 in	 a	 hotel,	 and	 that	 the	 girl	 was	 one	 of	 the	 hotel
employees—down	 to	 the	 hotel’s	 immense	 business	 offices	 where	 I
lodged	 a	 complaint	with	 the	 appropriate	 authorities	 about	 the	 girl’s
behavior,	 but	 without	 much	 success.	 Then	 the	 dream	 lapsed	 into
tremendous	 journeys	 and	 tremendous	 haste.	 What	 do	 you	 think	 of
that?	 Actually,	 the	 old	 dream	 is	 even	 clearer	 in	my	mind	 than	 this
one,	but	I	won’t	describe	it	to	you	today.
At	 the	 risk	 of	 ruining	 your	 Sunday,	 I	 am	 sending	 you	 my	 most
recent	 photograph,	 and	 3	 copies	 at	 that,	 since	 I	 think	 I	 have
discovered	that	in	larger	quantities	it	loses	some	of	its	horror.	I	don’t
know	what	 to	 do,	 flashlights	 always	 give	me	 a	mad	 look—the	 face
twisted,	 the	 eyes	 crossed	 and	 staring.	 Don’t	 worry,	 dearest,	 I	 don’t
look	like	that,	this	picture	doesn’t	count,	it	isn’t	one	you	should	carry
around	with	 you,	 I’ll	 send	 you	 a	 better	 one	 soon.	 In	 reality	 I	 am	at
least	twice	as	beautiful	as	in	this	picture.	If	that’s	not	enough	for	you,
dearest,	then	things	are	indeed	serious.	In	that	case,	what	am	I	to	do?
However,	you	do	have	a	 fairly	 true	picture	of	me;	 the	way	I	 look	 in
the	little	book	[Meditation]	 is	how	I	really	 look,	at	 least	 that’s	how	I
looked	a	short	while	ago.	And	whether	you	like	it	or	not,	I	belong	to
you.

Franz

From	January	5	to	6,	1913
[Presumably	during	the	night	of	January	4	to	5,	1913]

Once	 again	 worked	 badly,	 very	 badly,	 dearest!	 It’s	 terrible	 that	 it
cannot	be	held	on	to	for	any	length	of	time;	it	just	writhes	like	a	living
thing	between	one’s	fingers!
Just	 imagine,	now	one	can	no	 longer	 rely	even	on	express	 letters;
your	express	letter	didn’t	arrive	at	the	office	until	yesterday	evening;
as	a	result,	I	didn’t	get	it	until	this	morning.	This	is	the	kind	of	letter
that	quickens	one’s	 step	up	 the	 stairs,	 and	upstairs	makes	one	 stand



close	to	the	window	with	it	(at	8:15	it	is	still	quite	dark),	and	for	all
those	who	consider	this	kind	of	 letter	reading	a	reason	for	gathering
around	 and	 asking	 questions,	 one	 has,	 even	 over	 the	most	 doubtful
matters,	an	affirmative	nod,	free	from	all	worries.
And	 then	 the	 second	 letter	 arrived,	 and	 we	 were	 in	 Frankfurt

together	 and	embraced	 each	other,	 rather	 than	 the	 emptiness	 in	 the
room,	as	hitherto.	But	dearest,	you	slightly	blunted	the	nasty	point	of
my	question.	If	we	are	treating	it	as	a	game,	we	must	play	the	game	to
the	end;	you	really	must	know	me	at	my	worst	as	well	as	at	my	best;
it	is	easier	for	me,	you	invariably	dear	and	good	one!
To	tell	the	truth,	at	this	very	moment	I	am	in	an	intolerable	state,

and	 the	only	good	 thing	about	me	 is	 that	 I	 am	angry	with	myself.	 I
have	written	badly,	and	as	a	result	am	seized	by	a	kind	of	numbness.	I
am	not	tired,	not	sleepy,	not	sad,	not	cheerful;	I	haven’t	the	strength
to	 bring	 you	 here	 with	 my	 thoughts,	 although	 on	 my	 right	 there
happens	 to	be	an	empty	chair,	as	 though	ready	 for	you;	 I	am	in	 the
grip	of	something,	and	cannot	free	myself.
And	 this,	 for	 example,	 is	 just	 how	 it	 would	 be	 in	 our	 Frankfurt

affair.	Nothing	would	have	happened	 to	me,	as	you	rightly	 suppose;
absolutely	 nothing	 would	 have	 happened	 to	 me;	 I	 would	 just	 lie
quietly	in	my	bed	while	according	to	the	clock	on	the	chair	by	my	bed
the	moment	for	our	appointment	would	approach,	arrive,	and	pass.	I
would	have	no	excuse,	I	would	have	nothing	to	say,	I	would	just	feel
guilty.	 The	 impression	 I	would	make	 on	 you	 in	 this	 state	would	 be
similar	to	that	which	some	of	my	letters	make	upon	you,	the	ones	to
which	your	reply	begins	with	the	question:	“Now,	Franz,	what	am	I	to
do	with	you?”
Do	 I	 torment	 you	 with	 my	 obstinacy?	 Yet	 how	 else	 but	 through

obstinacy	can	the	obstinate	make	sure	of	his	 incredible	good	fortune
which,	sent	from	heaven,	came	to	him	on	a	certain	August	evening?

Franz

I	don’t	know	whether	you	go	to	the	office	on	Epiphany,	which	is
why	I	am	sending	this	letter	to	your	home;	tomorrow	I	will	write
another	to	your	office.

January	5,	1913
Only	a	few	words,	my	poor	dearest	one!	It	is	dizzily	late;	if	I	am	still



to	send	you	Sunday	greetings,	 it	will	have	to	be	done	with	lightning
speed.	All	I	have	in	mind	is	to	embrace	you,	not	only	for	myself,	but
also	 to	 let	 you	 know	 about	 it.	 But—it	 has	 just	 occurred	 to	 me—
perhaps	the	reason	why	we	don’t	get	together	is	that	I	would	have	the
overwhelming	desire	to	kiss	you	at	once;	whereupon	I	declare	before
the	Powers	on	High	that	to	begin	with	I	would	be	quite	content,	my
poor	dearest	one,	to	be	allowed	to	stroke	your	hand.

Franz

From	January	5	to	6,	1913
Poor,	 poor	 dearest,	 may	 you	 never	 feel	 compelled	 to	 read	 this
miserable	novel	I	keep	writing	away	at	so	dismally.	It	is	terrible	how
it	 can	 change	 its	 appearance;	 once	 the	 load	 (the	ardor	 I	write	with!
How	 the	 inkspots	 fly!)	 is	 on	 the	 cart,	 I	 am	 all	 right;	 I	 delight	 in
cracking	the	whip	and	am	a	man	of	 importance;	but	once	it	 falls	off
the	cart	(which	cannot	be	foreseen,	prevented,	or	concealed),	as	it	did
yesterday	 and	 today,	 then	 it	 feels	 excessively	 heavy	 for	 my	 pitiful
shoulders;	 all	 I	 want	 to	 do	 then	 is	 abandon	 everything	 and	 dig	my
grave	on	the	spot.	After	all,	there	can	be	no	more	beautiful	spot	to	die
in,	no	spot	more	worthy	of	total	despair,	than	one’s	own	novel.	At	this
moment	 two	 people—grown	 somewhat	 dim	 since	 yesterday—are
talking	to	each	other	on	two	adjacent	balconies	on	the	8th	floor	at	3
in	the	morning.5	How	would	 it	be	 if	 I	called	out	“goodbye”	 to	 them
from	 the	 street,	 and	 abandoned	 them	 completely?	 They	 would
collapse	there	on	their	balconies	and	with	corpselike	expressions	stare
at	each	other	through	the	railings.	But	I	am	only	threatening,	dearest,
I	won’t	really	do	it.	If—no	if,	once	again	I’m	going	astray.
Today	I	really	tried	to	sleep	in	the	afternoon,	but	it	didn’t	turn	out
too	well	 because	 next	 door—I	 hadn’t	 thought	 of	 it	 beforehand—the
600–700	 invitations	 to	 my	 sister’s	 wedding,	 which	 is	 to	 take	 place
next	Sunday,	were	being	made	 ready,	and	my	 future	brother-in-law,
who	 is	 in	 charge	 of	 this	 operation,	 has,	 notwithstanding	 his	 many
attractive	qualities,	 a	voice	 so	piercing	and	 so	 readily	exercised	 that
anyone	trying	to	sleep	in	an	adjoining	room	has,	at	the	sound	of	this
voice,	 the	 sensation	 that	 a	 saw	 has	 been	 placed	 at	 his	 throat.	 Of
course,	under	these	circumstances	one	doesn’t	sleep	very	well;	it	was	a
constant	starting	up	and	dropping	back	to	sleep.	And	in	order	to	sleep,
I	had	foregone	a	 lovely	walk.	But	 in	 the	end	I	did	get	enough	sleep,



and	it	cannot	be	used	as	an	excuse	for	my	bad	writing.
What	about	the	remarks,	dearest,	your	parents	made	about	me?	On
this	subject	I	want	to	know	every	word	and	every	gesture.	Come	now,
how	 long	 you	 keep	 these	 things	 from	 me!	 When	 I	 hear	 of	 such
remarks,	I	get	such	a	sense	of	your	nearness;	whether	happy	or	sad,	it
is	 so	 intense	 and	 so	 desirable	 to	me,	who	 is	 so	 completely	 shut	 out
from	your	physical	nearness,	that	lost	in	its	joys	I	can	stare	for	ages	at
such	 information	without	 reading,	without	 thinking,	without	 feeling
anything	 other	 than	 you.	 Then	 I	 am	 close	 beside	 you;	 when	 your
parents	 address	 you	 they	 are	 addressing	 me,	 and	 I	 am	 part	 of	 the
blood	 cycle	 from	 which	 you	 spring.	 Perhaps	 there	 is	 no	 greater
nearness,	the	next	step	would	be	actual	permeation.
Nor	have	we	quite	finished,	Felice,	with	that	“rather	nice-looking”
pediatrician.	I	am	going	to	hold	on	to	him	for	a	little	while	yet;	he	is	a
minor	counterpart	 to	 the	Frankfurt	affair,	and	 in	 fact	basically,	even
though	unintentionally,	a	question	put	to	me.	I	have	to	answer	it.	If	I
were	only	jealous,	dearest,	nothing	other	than	jealous,	then	after	your
account	I	could	become	more	jealous	still.	For	if	this	pediatrician	was
of	such	importance	that	it	meant	telling	an	untruth	to	protect	yourself
from	him,	 then——	But	dearest,	 this	 is	 the	 reasoning	of	 one	who	 is
jealous,	not	mine,	though	I	may	be	able	to	entertain	it.	My	reasoning
is	this:	You	got	on	well	with	the	doctor,	you	spent	a	pleasant	evening
with	 him,	 he	 tried	 to	 establish	 a	 relationship,	 and	 by	 and	 large—at
least	 to	 the	point	of	 a	 short	morning	meeting—that	would	not	have
been	unwelcome,	either	to	you	or	to	your	mother;	it	seems	that	owing
to	 your	 refusal	 of	 this	 relationship	 any	 further	 relationship	 is	 now
impossible	 or	 at	 least	 improbable,	 and	 for	 that,	 according	 to	 your
account,	Felice,	I	alone	am	responsible,	and	indeed	I	have	every	right
to	 be.	 And	 how	 do	 I	 bear	 this	 responsibility?	 With	 pride,	 or
satisfaction,	 or	 to	 attract	 further	 responsibility?	 No,	 I	 complain,	 I
actually	moan;	I	would	have	liked	the	doctor	to	have	come	up	to	see
you	 and	 your	 parents,	 to	 have	 continued	 to	 prove	 himself	 the	 nice
man	 he	 was	 on	 New	 Year’s	 Eve,	 to	 have	 been	 gay	 and	 been	 gaily
received.	For	who	am	I	to	dare	get	in	his	way?	A	shadow	who	loves
you	infinitely,	but	who	cannot	be	drawn	into	the	light.	Shame	on	me!
—Now	 of	 course	 the	 time	 has	 come	 to	 let	 the	 whirl	 spin	 in	 the
opposite	direction.	I	would	be	consumed	with	jealousy	were	I	to	hear
from	 afar	 that	 the	 doctor	 in	 fact	 succeeded	 in	 everything	 I	 have	 so
urgently	wished	him	on	the	preceding	page,	and	the	untruth	you	told
him	 came	not	 from	your	 true	 self,	 but	was	 spoken	 from	within	me,



and	I	would	almost	like	to	think	that	at	that	moment	your	voice	had
about	it	a	faint	ring	of	mine.—But	how	does	this	view	accord	with	the
earlier	 one?	 (So	 once	 again	 my	 answer	 turns	 into	 nothing	 but	 a
question	put	to	you.)	Only	as	a	whirl.	And	is	it	possible	for	me	to	be
pulled	out	of	this	whirl?	That	I	cannot	believe.
Besides,	 I	 know	 from	my	nature	 cures	 that	 all	 dangers	 stem	 from
medicine,	 no	 matter	 whether	 it	 be	 an	 oculist,	 a	 dentist,	 or	 a
pediatrician.	This	stupid	pen!	What	stupidities	will	it	not	shrink	from
putting	down	on	paper	instead	of	writing	something	sensible	for	once,
such	 as	 “Dearest	 one!”	 and	 then	 again	 “Dearest	 one!”	 and	 nothing
else.
My	 thinking	 about	 you	 is	more	 sensible	 than	my	writing	 to	 you.
Last	night	I	couldn’t	and	wouldn’t	go	to	sleep	for	a	long	time,	and	for
two	hours	I	lay	there	more	awake	than	asleep,	continuously	in	a	most
intimate	 conversation	with	you.	Nothing	particular	was	discussed	or
explained,	 it	was	simply	a	 form	of	 intimate	conversation,	 the	feeling
of	nearness	and	devotion.

Franz

From	January	6	to	7,	1913
Don’t	laugh,	dearest,	don’t	laugh,	at	this	moment	I	feel	terribly	serious
about	my	wish:	If	only	you	were	here!	As	a	kind	of	game	I	often	work
out	 how	 many	 hours—in	 the	 fastest	 possible	 way,	 under	 the	 best
possible	conditions—it	would	take	me	to	reach	you,	how	many	hours
for	you	to	reach	me.	It	is	always	too	long,	far	too	long,	so	desperately
long	that	even	if	 it	weren’t	 for	other	obstacles,	one	could	not	decide
on	 the	 attempt,	 simply	 on	 account	 of	 the	 time	 it	 would	 take.	 This
evening	I	went	straight	 from	home	to	 the	house	on	Ferdinandstrasse
where	your	 agent	has	his	 office.	 It	 almost	 looked	as	 though	 I	had	a
rendezvous	with	you	there.	But	I	walked	around	the	house	alone,	and
alone	I	went	away	again.	I	could	not	even	find	a	mention	of	the	firm
of	 Lindström	 among	 the	 nameplates:	 The	 man	 calls	 himself	 simply
general	 agent	 for	 a	 gramophone	 company.	 Why?	 I	 often	 complain
about	 the	 paucity	 of	 localities	 in	 Prague	 that	 have,	 at	 least	 to	 my
knowledge,	 any	 association	 with	 you.	 The	 Brods’	 apartment,
Schalengasse,	 Kohlenmarkt,	 Perlgasse,	 Obstgasse,	 the	 Graben.	 And
then	there’s	the	café	in	the	Repräsentationshaus,6	the	breakfast	room
at	the	Blaue	Stern	and	the	vestibule.	Very	few,	dearest,	but	how	these



few	stand	out	for	me	on	the	city	map!
I	have	so	much	to	say	to	you	today	in	answer	to	both	your	letters
that	 if	 your	mother	were	able	 to	 see	 it	 she	would	have	 to	 speculate
like	this:	How	is	 it	possible	to	write	at	all	 if	one	has	so	much	to	say
and	knows	that	the	pen	can	only	trace	an	uncertain	and	random	trail
through	the	mass	of	what	has	to	be	said?
So	 you	 put	 my	 picture	 into	 your	 little	 heart	 (not	 heart,
presumptuous	me!)	 in	 your	 locket	 as	 an	 uncomfortable	 neighbor	 to
your	 little	 niece	 and,	 if	 I	 have	 read	 correctly,	 you	 intend	 to	wear	 it
night	 and	 day?	 Didn’t	 you	 feel	 tempted	 to	 throw	 away	 that	 bad
picture?	Don’t	you	find	my	stare	too	frightening?	Does	it	deserve	the
honor	you	bestow	on	 it?	To	 think	 that	my	picture	 is	 tucked	 in	your
locket	while	 I	 sit	here	all	alone	 in	my	 freezing	cold	 room	(where	 to
my	great	shame	I	seem	to	have	caught	a	cold	just	lately)!	But	just	you
wait,	you	bad	photograph,	it	will	be	a	blessed	moment	when	I	arrive
and	with	my	own	hand	take	you	out	of	the	locket.	But	I	won’t	throw
you	away	if	only	on	account	of	the	glances	Felice	may	have	wasted	on
you.
I	 shall	 stop;	 it’s	 late,	 and	 I	 could	 never	 finish;	 in	 any	 case,	 what
business	have	my	hands	to	write	letters	if	all	they	are	made	for	and	all
they	want	is	to	hold	you!

Franz

January	7,	1913
My	dearest	Felice,	I	am	writing	to	you	this	afternoon	because	I	don’t
know	whether	I	shall	be	able	to	get	out	of	bed	at	all	tonight.	Perhaps	I
had	 better	 sleep	 right	 through.	 I	 have	 obviously	 caught	 a	 cold,	 and
what’s	more	I	feel	chilled	through	and	through;	I	can’t	believe	it,	and
yet	 I	 have.	And	 if	 it	 isn’t	 a	 cold,	 it	 is	 something	 devilishly	 like	 it.	 I
shall	 drink	 hot	 lemonade,	 wrap	 a	 hot	 towel	 around	 me,	 withdraw
from	the	world,	and	dream	about	Felice.	All	chills	and	all	ghosts	will
be	driven	out	of	me	and	my	room	by	heat,	to	provide	a	clean	abode
for	my	thoughts	of	you,	my	dearest	child.
I	 am	 not	 to	 say	 another	word	 against	 the	mail?	 Just	 listen,	 I	 got
your	 Sunday	 evening	 letter	 on	Monday	morning;	 on	 the	 other	 hand
your	 Sunday	 morning	 letter	 only	 this	 morning,	 Tuesday.	 (Letters
arrive	more	promptly	at	the	office,	our	apartment	is	so	remote.)	It	can
only	 have	 been	 on	 account	 of	 your	 pictures,	 which	 the	 post	 office



begrudges	me.	 Dearest,	what	 a	 lovely	 picture!	 Perhaps	 not	 in	 every
detail,	but	the	expression,	the	smile,	and	the	pose!	Something	useless
is	gnawing	in	my	head,	but	it	stops	for	a	moment	when	I	look	at	your
picture.	Now	I	see	you	more	or	less	as	I	saw	you	that	first	time.	I	no
longer	remember	this	position	of	your	hands,	but	I	think	it	is	coming
back	 to	 my	 mind.	 Your	 friendly	 expression	 is	 really	 meant	 for	 the
world	at	large	(just	as	my	staring	eyes	are	for	the	world	at	large),	but
I	am	taking	it	as	meant	for	me,	and	am	happy.
Please,	dearest,	don’t	give	a	single	thought	to	my	cold.	I	mention	it
only	because	 I	 like	 telling	you	every	 little	detail,	 as	 is	natural	when
the	 other’s	 face	 is	 as	 close	 as	 it	 should	 be	 in	 reality,	 but	 only
occasionally	 is	 in	 dreams.	 In	 any	 case,	 ever	 since	 my	 childhood	 a
minor,	 fleeting	 illness	 has	 always	 been	 a	 much	 coveted	 but	 rarely
achieved	 pleasure.	 It	 breaks	 the	 inexorable	 passage	 of	 time,	 and
bestows	 on	 this	 worn-out,	 dragged-along	 being	 that	 one	 is	 a	 minor
rebirth,	which	I	am	now	really	beginning	to	crave.	And	it	may	be	only
so	that	you,	Felice,	should	have	a	more	lovable	letter	writer,	who	is	at
last	 beginning	 to	 realize	 that	 you	 are	 too	 precious	 to	 be	 constantly
harried	by	complaints.

Franz

[IN	THE	MARGIN]	7:45	A.M.	The	treatment	is	over;	off	to	the	office.

From	January	8	to	9,	1912	[1913]
Today	for	various	reasons,	instead	of	writing,	I	went	for	a	walk	with
that	Dr.	Weltsch,	after	spending	an	hour	and	a	half	in	the	midst	of	his
family,	 listening	 to	 his	 father,	 an	 intelligent	 man,	 interested	 in
everything—he	owns	a	small	drapery	business—telling	many	beautiful
stories	 of	 the	old	Prague	ghetto	 at	 the	 time	of	his	 grandfather,	who
owned	a	 large	drapery	business.	 I	 felt	 the	need	to	be	with	strangers,
and	yet	did	not	 feel	 at	 ease	 in	 their	 company.	 In	 this	predicament	 I
can	never	look	steadily	at	the	person	who	is	talking	to	me;	my	eyes,	if
I	 let	 them,	 wander	 from	 the	 stranger’s	 face;	 and	 if	 I	 resist,	 then	 of
course	it	is	no	longer	a	steady	look,	but	a	stare.	But	do	I	really	want	to
describe	 the	whole	evening?	No,	but	 from	the	 immense	 tangle	of	all
there	 is	 to	 say,	 the	 slightly	 dulled	mind	produces	 only	 the	 arbitrary
and	the	trivial.	Actually	it	seems	as	though	in	the	last	few	days	I	have
told	you	so	little	and	answered	so	few	of	even	the	most	urgent	things



that	 I	 sometimes	have	 the	 feeling	 I	am	about	 to	 lose	your	attention.
This	must	not	happen,	Felice.	Don’t	misinterpret	my	failure	to	answer
particular	questions,	don’t	hold	it	against	me;	these	waves	that	carry
me	 along	 are	 dark,	 muddy,	 heavy	 water;	 I	 advance	 slowly,	 and
sometimes	get	 stuck,	but	 then	am	swept	 forward	again,	and	all	goes
fairly	well.	This	you	must	 surely	have	noticed	during	our	 first	 three
months.
I	can	also	laugh,	Felice,	have	no	doubt	about	this;	I	am	even	known
as	 a	 great	 laugher,	 although	 in	 this	 respect	 I	 used	 to	 be	 far	 crazier
than	 I	 am	now.	 It	 even	 happened	 to	me	 once,	 at	 a	 solemn	meeting
with	our	president—it	was	 two	years	 ago,	 but	 the	 story	will	 outlive
me	 at	 the	 office—that	 I	 started	 to	 laugh,	 and	 how!	 It	would	 be	 too
involved	to	describe	to	you	this	man’s	importance;	but	believe	me,	it
is	very	great:	an	ordinary	employee	thinks	of	this	man	as	not	on	this
earth,	but	in	the	clouds.	And	as	we	usually	have	little	opportunity	of
talking	to	the	Emperor,	contact	with	this	man	is	for	the	average	clerk
—a	 situation	 common	 of	 course	 to	 all	 large	 organizations—
tantamount	 to	 meeting	 the	 Emperor.	 Needless	 to	 say,	 like	 anyone
exposed	 to	 clear	 and	general	 scrutiny	whose	position	does	not	quite
correspond	to	his	achievements,	this	man	invites	ridicule;	but	to	allow
oneself	to	be	carried	away	by	laughter	at	something	so	commonplace
and,	what’s	more,	in	the	presence	of	the	great	man	himself,	one	must
be	out	of	one’s	mind.	At	that	time	we,	two	colleagues	and	I,	had	just
been	 promoted,	 and	 in	 our	 formal	 black	 suits	 had	 to	 express	 our
thanks	 to	 the	 president—here	 I	 must	 not	 forget	 to	 add	 that	 for	 a
special	 reason	 I	 owed	 the	 president7	 special	 gratitude.	 The	 most
dignified	of	us	(I	was	the	youngest)	made	the	speech	of	thanks—short,
sensible,	 dashing,	 in	 accordance	 with	 his	 character.	 The	 president
listened	in	his	usual	posture	adopted	for	solemn	occasions,	somewhat
reminiscent	 of	 our	 Emperor	 when	 giving	 audience—which,	 if	 one
happens	to	be	in	a	certain	mood,	is	a	terribly	funny	pose.	Legs	lightly
crossed,	left	hand	clenched	and	resting	on	the	very	corner	of	the	table,
head	lowered	so	that	the	long	white	beard	curves	on	his	chest,	and,	on
top	 of	 all	 this,	 his	 not	 excessively	 large	 but	 nevertheless	 protruding
stomach	 gently	 swaying.	 I	 must	 have	 been	 in	 a	 very	 uncontrolled
mood	 at	 the	 time,	 for	 I	 knew	 this	 posture	well	 enough,	 and	 it	 was
quite	unreasonable	for	me	to	be	attacked	by	fits	of	the	giggles	(albeit
with	interruptions),	which	so	far	however	could	easily	be	taken	as	due
to	a	 tickle	 in	 the	 throat,	especially	as	 the	president	did	not	 look	up.
My	 colleague’s	 clear	 voice,	 eyes	 fixed	 straight	 ahead—he	 was	 no



doubt	aware	of	my	condition,	without	being	affected	by	it—still	kept
me	 in	 check.	 But	 at	 the	 end	 of	my	 colleague’s	 speech	 the	 president
raised	 his	 head,	 and	 then	 for	 a	 moment	 I	 was	 seized	 with	 terror,
without	 laughter,	 for	 now	 he	 could	 see	 my	 expression	 and	 easily
ascertain	 that	 the	sound	unfortunately	escaping	 from	my	mouth	was
definitely	not	a	cough.	But	when	he	began	his	speech,	again	the	usual
one,	 all	 too	 familiar,	 in	 the	 imperial	 mold,	 delivered	 with	 great
conviction,	a	 totally	meaningless	and	unnecessary	 speech;	and	when
my	 colleague	 with	 sidelong	 glances	 tried	 to	 warn	 me	 (I	 was	 doing
everything	in	my	power	to	control	myself),	and	in	so	doing	reminded
me	 vividly	 of	 the	 joys	 of	 my	 earlier	 laughter,	 I	 could	 no	 longer
restrain	 myself	 and	 all	 hope	 that	 I	 should	 ever	 be	 able	 to	 do	 so
vanished.	At	first	I	laughed	only	at	the	president’s	occasional	delicate
little	 jokes;	 but	 while	 it	 is	 a	 rule	 only	 to	 contort	 one’s	 features
respectfully	 at	 these	 little	 jokes,	 I	 was	 already	 laughing	 out	 loud;
observing	 my	 colleagues’	 alarm	 at	 being	 infected	 by	 it,	 I	 felt	 more
sorry	for	them	than	for	myself,	but	I	couldn’t	help	it;	I	didn’t	even	try
to	avert	or	cover	my	 face,	but	 in	my	helplessness	continued	 to	 stare
straight	at	 the	president,	 incapable	of	 turning	my	head,	probably	on
the	instinctive	assumption	that	everything	could	only	get	worse	rather
than	better,	and	that	therefore	it	would	be	best	to	avoid	any	change.
And	now	that	I	was	in	full	spate,	I	was	of	course	laughing	not	only	at
the	 current	 jokes,	 but	 at	 those	 of	 the	 past	 and	 the	 future	 and	 the
whole	 lot	 together,	 and	 by	 then	 no	 one	 knew	 what	 I	 was	 really
laughing	 about.	 A	 general	 embarrassment	 set	 in;	 only	 the	 president
remained	 relatively	 unconcerned,	 as	 behooves	 a	 great	 man
accustomed	to	the	ways	of	the	world	and	to	whom	the	possibility	of
irreverence	 toward	 his	 person	 would	 not	 even	 occur.	 Had	 we	 been
able	to	slip	out	at	this	moment	(the	president	had	evidently	shortened
his	 speech	 a	 little),	 everything	might	 still	 have	 gone	 fairly	well;	 no
doubt	 my	 behavior	 would	 have	 remained	 discourteous,	 but	 this
discourtesy	would	not	have	been	mentioned,	and	the	whole	affair,	as
sometimes	happens	with	apparently	impossible	situations,	might	have
been	dealt	with	by	a	conspiracy	of	silence	between	the	four	of	us.	But
unfortunately	 my	 colleague,	 the	 one	 hitherto	 unmentioned	 (a	 man
close	to	40,	a	heavy	beer	drinker	with	a	round,	childish,	but	bearded
face),	 started	 to	 make	 a	 totally	 unexpected	 little	 speech.	 At	 that
moment	 this	 struck	me	 as	 quite	 incomprehensible;	my	 laughter	 had
made	him	lose	his	composure,	he	had	stood	there	with	cheeks	blown
out	 with	 suppressed	 laughter—and	 now	 he	 embarked	 on	 a	 serious



speech.	Actually	this	was	quite	consistent	with	his	character.	Empty-
headed	and	impetuous,	he	is	capable	of	defending	generally	accepted
statements,	passionately	and	at	length,	and	the	boredom	of	this	kind
of	 speech,	 without	 the	 absurd	 but	 engaging	 passion,	 would	 be
intolerable.	Now,	the	president	in	all	innocence	had	said	something	to
which	 this	 colleague	of	mine	 took	exception.	 In	addition,	 influenced
by	my	continuous	laughter,	he	may	have	forgotten	where	he	was;	 in
short,	 he	 assumed	 the	moment	had	 come	 to	 air	his	 particular	 views
and	 to	 convince	 the	 president	 (a	 man	 utterly	 indifferent	 to	 other
people’s	opinions).	So	now,	as	he	started	to	hold	forth,	brandishing	his
arms,	about	something	absurdly	childish	(even	in	general,	but	here	in
particular),	 it	was	too	much	for	me:	the	world,	the	semblance	of	the
world	which	hitherto	I	had	seen	before	me,	dissolved	completely,	and
I	 burst	 into	 loud	 and	 uninhibited	 laughter	 of	 such	 heartiness	 as
perhaps	 only	 schoolchildren	 at	 their	 desks	 are	 capable	 of.	 A	 silence
fell,	and	now	at	last	my	laughter	and	I	were	the	acknowledged	center
of	attention.	While	I	laughed	my	knees	of	course	shook	with	fear,	and
my	colleagues	on	their	part	could	join	in	to	their	hearts’	content,	but
they	 could	 never	 match	 the	 full	 horror	 of	 my	 long-rehearsed	 and	 -
practiced	laughter,	and	thus	they	remained	comparatively	unnoticed.
Beating	my	breast	with	my	right	hand,	partly	in	awareness	of	my	sin
(remembering	the	Day	of	Atonement),	and	partly	to	drive	out	all	the
suppressed	laughter,	I	produced	innumerable	excuses	for	my	behavior,
all	 of	which	might	 have	 been	 very	 convincing	had	not	 the	 renewed
outbursts	of	laughter	rendered	them	completely	unintelligible.	By	now
of	 course	 even	 the	 president	 was	 disconcerted;	 and	 in	 a	 manner
typical	only	of	people	born	with	an	instinct	for	smoothing	things	out,
he	 found	 some	 phrase	 that	 offered	 some	 reasonable	 explanation	 for
my	 howls—I	 think	 an	 allusion	 to	 a	 joke	 he	 had	 made	 a	 long	 time
before.	 He	 then	 hastily	 dismissed	 us.	 Undefeated,	 roaring	 with
laughter	yet	desperately	unhappy,	I	was	the	first	to	stagger	out	of	the
hall.—By	writing	a	letter	to	the	president	immediately	afterwards	and
through	the	good	offices	of	one	of	the	president’s	sons	whom	I	know
well,	and	thanks	also	to	the	passage	of	time,	the	whole	thing	calmed
down	 considerably.	 Needless	 to	 say,	 I	 did	 not	 achieve	 complete
absolution,	 nor	 shall	 I	 ever	 achieve	 it.	 But	 this	matters	 little;	 I	may
have	behaved	in	this	fashion	at	the	time	simply	in	order	to	prove	to
you	later	that	I	am	capable	of	laughter.
Well	 now—and	 so	 my	 old	 offense	 against	 the	 president	 takes	 its
revenge	once	again—I	have	written	so	much,	yet	nothing.	But	 just	a



few	answers	in	great	haste	before	going	to	bed:	Intensity	of	Feeling	of
course	belongs	to	you,	entirely	to	you.	The	dedication	“as	a	friend”	is
meant	 explicitly	 for	 you;	 I	 hope	 you	 accept	 it?	 (I	 of	 course	 have
another	 dedication	 copy.)	 And	 if	 the	 dedication	 has	 a	 slight	 double
meaning	(which	in	fact	it	hasn’t,	but	which	I	am	now	insinuating),	it
is	 that	 Max	 is	 also	 a	 friend	 of	 mine,	 that	 this	 dedication	 therefore
gives	me	an	opportunity	of	coming	very	close	to	you	(I	want	to	make
use	of	even	the	slightest	opportunity	of	coming	close	to	you),	would
that	be	so	bad?
No,	it	is	really	too	late	to	continue.	I	am	enclosing	a	heller	I	found
today	on	my	evening	walk.	 I	was	 just	 complaining	about	 something
(there	 is	nothing	 I	 couldn’t	 complain	about),	and	 in	my	discontent	 I
put	my	 foot	 down	 hard,	 and	with	 the	 tip	 of	my	 toe	 kicked	 up	 this
heller	 on	 the	 pavement.	 These	hellers	 are	 lucky,	 but	 I	 need	no	 luck
that	is	not	also	yours,	so	I	send	it	to	you.	Isn’t	my	finding	it	as	good	as
if	you	had	found	it?

Franz

From	January	10	to	11,	1913
[Probably	from	January	9	to	10,	1913]

My	dearest,	only	a	few	words	today,	it	 is	 late,	I	am	tired,	have	been
disturbed	 this	 afternoon,	 and	 indeed	will	 be	 for	 another	 few	days.	 I
shall	 have	 to	 leave	my	writing—which	 I	 don’t	want	 assailed	by	 any
disturbance	 (it	 suffers	 more	 than	 enough	 as	 it	 is	 from	 inner
disturbances)—for	 a	 week,	 perhaps	 even	 longer;	 the	 only
compensation	will	be	more	sleep;	it	won’t	be	enough,	but	anything	I
write	today	doesn’t	count	at	all	because	bed	is	definitely	where	I	now
belong,	 but	 apart	 from	 this	 I	 also	 definitely	 belong	 to	 you,	 thus	 I
vacillate	between	the	two	of	you.
My	poor	dearest	writing	sales	letters!	Do	I	get	one	too,	though	I’m
not	a	buyer?	Although,	if	anything,	I	am	fundamentally	frightened	of
Parlographs?	A	machine	with	its	silent,	serious	demands	strikes	me	as
exercising	a	greater,	more	cruel	compulsion	on	one’s	capacities	 than
any	 human	 being.	 How	 insignificant,	 how	 easy	 to	 control,	 to	 send
away,	to	shout	down,	upbraid,	question,	or	stare	at,	a	living	typist	is!
He	who	dictates	is	master,	but	faced	with	a	Parlograph	he	is	degraded
and	 becomes	 a	 factory	worker	whose	 brain	 has	 to	 serve	 a	whirring
machine.	Think	how	a	long	chain	of	thought	is	forced	out	of	the	poor,



naturally	 slow-working	 brain!	 You’re	 lucky,	 dearest,	 not	 to	 have	 to
reply	to	these	objections	in	your	sales	letter;	they	are	irrefutable.	That
the	speed	of	the	machine	is	easy	to	regulate,	that	one	can	put	it	away
when	 one	 doesn’t	 feel	 like	 dictating,	 etc.,	 is	 no	 refutation	 of	 this
argument,	for	the	fact	that	all	this	does	not	help	is	part	of	the	nature
of	 the	man	who	makes	 these	 objections.	What	 I	 noticed	 about	 your
prospectus	was	that	it	is	worded	with	great	pride;	there	is	no	begging
such	as	one	finds	in	similar	circulars	issued	by	Austrian	factories,	nor
is	 there	 any	 excessive	 praise.	 I’m	 not	 joking	 when	 I	 say	 that	 it
reminded	me—not,	of	course,	by	its	wording	or	 its	subject	matter	or
its	 style—of	Strindberg,	whom	I	hardly	know	but	have	always	 loved
in	a	very	special	way;	strange	that	my	first	letters	should	have	reached
you	when	 you	were	 under	 the	 spell	 of	The	 Dance	 of	 Death	 and	The
Gothic	 Room.	 Before	 long	 I	 must	 tell	 you	 something	 about	 the
“Memories	 of	 Strindberg”8	 that	 appeared	 not	 long	 ago	 in	 the	Neue
Rundschau;	their	effect	upon	me	was	to	make	me	run	around	my	room
one	Sunday	morning	like	a	lunatic.
Tomorrow	or	the	day	after	you	will	get	the	calendar	and	Flaubert.
The	calendar,	which	I’ve	only	just	received,	is	not	nearly	as	nice	as	I
had	 imagined,	and	so	 if	 I	were	 to	 tear	off	a	page	a	day,	 fold	 it,	and
send	 it	 to	 you,	 it	 would	 be	 nothing	 to	 be	 proud	 of.	 But	 since	 the
calendar	 is	here	and	 I	want	neither	 to	give	away	nor	 let	anyone	see
something	that	was	meant	for	you,	I’ll	send	it	to	you	after	all.	Hang	it
up	 in	some	corner!	The	beauty	to	balance	 its	ugliness	 is	supplied	by
Flaubert,	whom	 I	 really	 (unnecessary	 assertion!)	would	 like	 to	 have
placed	into	your	hands	myself.
That’s	that,	but	now	I	am	hot-foot	off	to	bed;	my	words	are	on	their
way	to	you,	your	thoughts	drawn	to	me,	and	I	am	content.
Don’t	 you	overexert	 yourself	writing	 to	me,	dearest?	A	 single	 line
from	you	 gives	me	 so	much	pleasure	 that	 five	 lines	 cannot	 give	me
more.

Franz

From	January	10	to	11,	1913
Above	all,	dearest,	no	self-reproaches	about	not	writing	enough!	You
write	far	too	much	for	the	little	time	you	have,	far	too	much!
As	long	as	you	keep	to	the	lovely	regularity	of	writing	every	day,	as
you	 have	 recently,	 I	 have	 no	 further	 wishes	 as	 far	 as	 writing	 is



concerned,	and	since	other	wishes	are	unattainable	at	the	moment,	or
forever,	all	is	well,	even	if	not	as	well	as	it	should	be.
That	 I	 should	 be	 sitting	 down	 at	 my	 desk	 to	 write	 to	 you
immediately	after	the	final	words	with	my	family,	instead	of	doing	my
writing	first	(as	I	always	used	to	do)	and	so	finding	myself	on	a	higher
level—either	 of	 happiness	 or	 unhappiness—this	worries	me.	 It	must
not	 continue	 for	 long;	 Monday	 I	 think	 I	 shall	 start	 to	 write	 again;
many	stories,	dearest,	are	drumming	their	marching	tunes	in	my	head.
And	yet	 I	sometimes	writhe	with	grief,	 for	which	there	are	 indeed
all	kinds	of	reasons.	Not	the	least	of	it	is	the	witnessing	of	these	two
engagements,	Max’s	and	my	sister’s.	In	bed	today	I	complained	to	you
about	these	two	engagements	in	a	long	speech	which	to	you	no	doubt
would	have	seemed	a	well-argued	one;	now	I	certainly	won’t	be	able
to	recollect	all	that	ought	to	be	said,	so	perhaps	I	had	better	leave	it.
You	have	no	idea	of	the	speeches	I	make	to	you	in	bed!	Lying	on	my
back,	my	 feet	 pressed	 against	 the	 bedposts,	 on	 I	 go,	 quietly	 talking
away	to	myself	for	my	favorite	listener!	We	have	such	very	different
talents.	In	bed	I	am	the	great	orator,	you	in	bed	the	great	letter	writer.
How	do	you	do	 it?	You	still	haven’t	described	 to	me	how	this	 letter
writing	in	bed	is	done.
I	 am	 not	 satisfied	 with	 either	 of	 these	 engagements,	 and	 yet	 I
strongly	 encouraged	 and	 perhaps	 helped	 to	 persuade	 Max	 to	 get
engaged;	 and	 I	 certainly	 never	 dissuaded	 my	 sister	 from	 getting
engaged.	 However,	 as	my	married	 sister’s	 [Elli’s]	marriage	 shows,	 I
am	 a	 bad	 prophet	 and	 judge	 of	 human	 nature;	 I	 felt	 the	 same
hopelessness	 at	 her	 engagement;	 yet	 this	 sister,	 who	 used	 to	 be	 an
awkward,	permanently	dissatisfied,	morose,	and	fidgety	girl,	has	now
by	 her	 marriage,	 in	 her	 happiness	 with	 her	 two	 children,	 truly
extended	her	being.9	But	even	so	I	cannot	mistrust	my	knowledge	of
human	nature;	I	don’t	feel	that	facts	have	proved	it	wrong,	so	it	must
have	 some	deeper	 truth,	 although	 this	may	mean	 that	 I	 give	my	 so-
called	knowledge	of	human	nature	simply	the	appearance	of	a	deep-
seated,	 obdurate	 stupidity.	 And	 besides—why	 do	 I	 suffer	 in	 this
strange	 way	 from	 these	 engagements	 as	 though	 an	 immediate	 and
direct	disaster	had	befallen	me,	when	all	possible	misgivings	can	only
apply	 to	 the	 future;	when	 those	 chiefly	 concerned	 are	 unexpectedly
happy	(could	it	be	that	I	am	hurt	by	this	unexpectedness?);	and	finally
when	I	myself,	personally	and	directly,	take	hardly	any	part	in	these
engagement	 and	 wedding	 matters?	 (Last	 night,	 without	 a	 trace	 of
malice,	 without	 any	 reference	 to	 my	 colossal	 lack	 of	 participation,



simply	 as	 a	 pointless	 joke,	 my	 future	 brother-in-law	 said,	 “Good
evening,	Franz!	How	are	you?	What	news	from	home?”	This	manner
of	speech,	if	you	like,	made	sense.)
In	fact,	however,	I	am	involved;	I	can	feel	the	two	strange	families
pressing	 upon	 me,	 my	 brother-in-law’s	 family	 is	 even	 being	 forced
upon	my	own	family.——
No,	 I	 won’t	 write	 any	 more	 today,	 it	 would	 not	 sound	 very
convincing	 at	 the	 moment;	 perhaps	 you	 have	 some	 idea	 of	 what	 I
mean	on	the	whole,	but	unfortunately	you	cannot	understand	it	from
a	distance	in	detail,	and	that’s	the	most	important.
At	 the	 very	moment	 you	 read	 this	 letter	 I	may	 be	 driving	 to	 the
synagogue—wearing	my	old	 tailcoat,	 cracked	patent-leather	 shoes,	a
top	 hat	 far	 too	 small	 for	 me,	 and	 with	 an	 unusually	 pale*	 face
(because	 nowadays	 I	 always	 take	 so	 long	 to	 get	 to	 sleep)	 in	 my
position	 as	 an	 usher	 sitting	 next	 to	 a	 pleasant,	 pretty,	 elegant,	 and
above	 all	 very	 considerate	 and	modest	 cousin—where	 the	 marriage
will	 be	 solemnized	 with	 that	 tremendous	 solemnity	 that	 upsets	 me
every	 time.	 Because	 the	 Jewish	 public	 in	 general,	 here	 at	 any	 rate,
have	limited	the	religious	ceremonies	to	weddings	and	funerals,	these
two	 occasions	 have	 drawn	 grimly	 close	 to	 each	 other,	 and	 one	 can
virtually	see	the	reproachful	glances	of	a	withering	faith.
Goodnight,	my	dearest.	How	glad	 I	am	that	 for	once	at	 least	your
Sunday	is	bound	to	be	quieter	than	mine.	I	wonder	with	what	remark
your	mother	will	hand	you	this	letter?

Franz

I	read	your	letter	again	and	since	it	has	made	me	wonder	about
several	things	I	just	want	to	ask	you	the	following	questions:
1.	What	is	the	meaning	of:	I	haven’t	detached	the	locket	yet.
2.	Who	 were	 the	 friends	 you	 went	 with?	 God	 knows	 why,	 but
names	make	everything	clear	to	me.
3.	What	was	it	like	at	the	mixed	baths?	Alas,	this	is	where	I	have
to	 suppress	 a	 remark	 (it	 refers	 to	my	appearance	 in	 the	bath,
my	thinness).†	 In	 the	 bath	 I	 look	 like	 an	 orphan.	Once,	 years
ago,	we	spent	the	summer	vacation	on	the	Elbe;	it	was	a	very
hot	 summer;	 river-bathing	 was	 especially	 pleasant.	 But	 the
bathing	establishment	was	very	small,	men	and	women	bathed
together,	 I	 don’t	 even	 remember	 if	 it	 had	 separate	 cabins;



anyway,	 the	people	 in	 that	 resort	were	 very	 gay	 and	 enjoyed
themselves.	 But	 not	 I;	 now	 and	 then	 I	 ventured	 among	 the
women,	but	rarely;	most	of	 the	 time—my	desire	 to	bathe	was
of	course	constant	and	immense—I	roamed	around	alone,	like	a
lost	dog,	 keeping	 to	 the	narrowest	paths	 that	 ran	on	 the	hills
alongside	 the	 river,	watching	 the	 small	 bathing	 establishment
for	 hours	 in	 the	 hope	 that	 it	 would	 at	 last	 be	 cleared	 and
accessible	 to	me.	How	 I	 cursed	 the	 latecomers,	who	 suddenly
crowded	 the	 empty	 pool	 again!	How	 I	 used	 to	moan	when	 it
had	been	exceptionally	hot	and	everyone	had	enjoyed	bathing,
and	 then	 a	 great	 thunderstorm	 broke	 and	 deprived	me	 of	 all
hope	of	a	swim.	As	a	rule	 I	could	bathe	only	 toward	evening,
but	by	then	the	air	was	cool	and	the	pleasure	no	longer	quite	as
great.	Just	occasionally	a	kind	of	sunstroke	made	me	reckless,
and	 I	 would	 take	 the	 overcrowded	 bathing	 establishment	 by
storm.	Then	I	could	bathe	in	peace	and	play	with	the	others;	no
one	paid	any	attention	to	the	 little	boy,	but	 I	couldn’t	believe
it.
4.	Some	time	I	should	like	to	hear	more	about	your	father.
But	 listen,	now	 it	 is	 late	again.	And	 I	 still	haven’t	prepared	any
entertainment	 for	 this	wedding	 feast,	 and	what’s	worse,	 I	 really
can’t	and	I	won’t.

Franz

[PICTURE	POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Prague,	January	11,	1913]

Wedding!
Wedding!
These	greetings
only.

F.K.

From	January	11	to	12,	1913
Just	now,	dearest,	 I	have	been	 racking	my	brains	 to	 find,	 if	nothing
better,	then	at	least	three	sentences	with	which	to	greet	the	wedding
guests.	At	last	I’ve	got	them,	they	are	dismal.	Oh,	if	I	were	allowed	to
make	 a	 speech	 against	 the	 guests,	 I	 shouldn’t	 have	 to	 prepare	 it,	 it



would	 flow	with	 swift	 coherence,	 and	 I	would	 venture	 to	 chase	 the
majority	 of	 guests	 out	 of	 the	 room,	 not	 by	 abuse,	 but	 by	 the
expression	 of	 my	 genuine	 and	 alarming	 emotions.	 As	 it	 is,	 I	 am
condemned	 to	 chase	myself	 away;	 it	 won’t	 be	 I	 who	will	 be	 sitting
there	 at	 the	 table,	 getting	 to	 my	 feet,	 uttering	 the	 three	 schoolboy
sentences	and	raising	my	glass—all	this	will	be	done	by	my	other	self
of	the	mournful	countenance.
But	I	really	didn’t	mean	to	tell	you	all	that,	I	am	really	writing	out
of	 fear.	 Listen!	Wasn’t	 there	 something	 in	 my	 last	 letter	 that	 could
have	upset,	hurt,	or	even	offended	you?	The	thought	of	it	chokes	me.
But	I	am	not	even	sure,	for	now	that	I	am	not	writing	for	myself	I	feel
as	 though	 I	 had	 relinquished	 the	 measure	 for	 such	 things.	 Perhaps
there	 was	 nothing	 offensive	 in	 that	 passage	 after	 all,	 but	 I	 had	 an
uncomfortable	feeling	even	while	writing	it	down,	and	now	it	strikes
me	all	at	once	as	brutal	and	cold	and	inconsiderate	and	rude.	In	any
case,	dearest,	for	my	peace	of	mind,	send	the	letter	back	to	me—but
no,	don’t	send	it	back.	Oh,	now	I	don’t	even	know	what	I	want;	what	a
state	I	have	got	myself	into!	I	shall	have	to	climb	a	long	way	before	I
get	out	of	it	again.	If	only	I	had	your	reply	to	my	last	letter,	the	one
you	got	on	Sunday;	perhaps	your	anger	with	me	over	one	particular
passage	drove	you	out	of	bed.	If	you	are	angry	with	me,	dearest,	then
forgive	 me—in	 my	 present	 state	 it	 is	 not	 shameful	 to	 cry	 for
sympathy,	 it	 is	 my	 state	 that	 is	 shameful—if	 you	 have	 already
forgiven	me,	 take	this	 letter	as	a	belated	apology;	 if	you	have	 found
no	 guilt	 whatever	 on	 my	 part,	 then	 laugh	 at	 me,	 there’s	 nothing	 I
should	like	better.

Franz

A	charming	remark	by	my	youngest	sister:	As	you	well	know,	she
loves	me	very	much;	blindly	she	considers	everything	I	say,	do,	or
think,	to	be	good,	but	at	the	same	time	has	such	a	sense	of	humor
of	 her	 own	 that	 she	 is	 capable	 of	 laughing	 both	 at	 me	 and	 of
course	at	herself	(for	she	is	always	on	my	side).	Now	there	isn’t	a
shadow	of	doubt	that	 I	have	been	saddened	by	this	wedding,	so
my	sister,	as	a	result	of	her	whole	attitude	to	me,	has	to	find	some
justification	 for	my	 sadness,	 though	of	 course	 she	 can	 share	my
feelings	 only	 to	 a	 very	 small	 degree.	 Well,	 this	 evening	 while
packing	Valli’s	(the	bride’s)	things,	our	housekeeper	began	to	cry,
making	Valli	cry,	too.	Valli	then	came	into	the	living	room	with



tears	in	her	eyes;	no	sooner	has	Ottla	(my	youngest	sister)	caught
sight	of	 those	 tears	 than	she	calls	out:	 “How	clever	 she	 is,	 she’s
crying,	 too!”	 This	 was	 meant	 half	 seriously,	 half	 in	 fun,	 and
implied	that	crying	was	right	and	proper	since	it	was	in	keeping
with	my	feelings,	and	so	Valli	must	be	clever	to	express	feelings
which	are	so	much	in	keeping	with	mine.
But	now	I	am	going	to	bed,	I	don’t	want	to	be	sleepy	tomorrow
on	top	of	everything	else.
At	 first	 I	was	almost	 frightened	by	 the	man	 from	Cairo.	He	 is
sure	to	be	a	good	German,	but	I	saw	him	as	an	Arab	draped	in	a
sheet,	 chasing	 you	 in	 the	 empty	 office.	What’s	 the	 good	 of	my
place	 at	 your	 desk!	 Better	 to	 be	 the	 night	 watchman	 in	 your
factory	than	so	distant	a	lover	as	I.

From	January	12	to	13,	1913
My	 dearest	 child,	 it	 is	 over,	 prospects	 of	 better	 days	 are	 emerging,
comparative	contentment	begins.	There	are	moments	when	I	have	the
feeling	 that	 to	 have	 got	 rid	 of	 these	 strangers	 no	 sacrifice	 was	 too
great,	 not	 even	 the	 sacrifice	 of	 my	 sister.	 Of	 course	 you	 must	 not
believe,	 and	 indeed	 you	 do	 not	 believe,	 that	 anything	 factual
corresponds	to	this	feeling,	but	the	feeling	itself	cannot	be	expelled.
I	got	your	letter,	the	postcard,	and	the	pictures	in	the	middle	of	the
wedding	 party,	 just	 as	 we	 were	 forming	 the	 procession.	 I	 felt	 as
though	you	were	squeezing	my	hand.
Oh,	 dearest,	 what	 nostalgic	 pleasure	 these	 pictures	 give!	 They	 all
represent	my	dearest	one;	 each	 is	different	 from	 the	others,	 they	all
take	hold	of	one	by	force.	In	these	pictures	you	again	look	very	much
like	 the	 little	 girl	 in	 the	 first	 picture	 you	 sent	me.	 You	 sit	 there	 so
quietly,	 your	 left	 hand	 completely	 idle,	 yet	 it	 cannot	 be	 seized,
something	 requiring	 thought	 is	 being	 dictated.	 An	 ingenious
photograph	in	the	event	of	one	having	planned	to	kiss	the	mouth.	Was
it	 taken	 in	 your	 office?	What	 is	 the	 difference	 between	 the	 various
mouthpieces	 of	 the	 instruments?	 Perhaps	 the	 picture	 is	meant	 to	 be
used	 for	 advertising	 purposes?	 Perhaps	 for	 picture	 postcards?	 But
surely	not?
Dearest,	I	wonder	what	you	would	have	said	to	me	today	if	you	had
seen	 me	 at	 the	 wedding.	 It	 really	 all	 went	 off	 more	 or	 less	 as	 I
expected;	 the	 only	 surprise	 was	 that	 it	 ever	 came	 to	 an	 end.	 But	 I
really	 hadn’t	 expected	 to	 find	 myself	 again	 in	 this	 dried-up,	 head-
hanging	condition,	in	which	I	felt	inferior	even	to	the	most	wretched



of	guests;	 I	 thought	 I	had	 left	 such	 states	of	mind	behind	me	 in	 the
legendary	 past.	 But	 now	 they	were	 back	 again,	 fresh	 as	 on	 the	 first
day	 of	 a	 long	 chain	 of	 unending	 days.	 Not	 until	 I	 was	 alone	 for	 a
moment	 in	 the	 coffeehouse	 after	 it	 was	 over,	 and	 had	 seen	 four
pictures	 by	 Daumier	 (The	 Butcher,	 The	 Concert,	 The	 Critics,	 The
Collector),	did	I	manage	to	pull	myself	together.

Franz

From	January	13	to	14,	1913
So	you	were	not	angry	with	me,	my	clearest	Felice,	about	the	Sunday
letter	 and	 even	 sacrificed	 part	 of	 your	 afternoon	 sleep	 which	 you,
tenfold	overtired,	need	so	badly.	Was	it	at	least	a	deep,	sound	sleep?
But	you	never	go	skating,	never	for	a	walk?	And	needless	to	say	you
have	no	time	for	reading.	Before	you	knew	me,	this	person	who	lives
by	and	through	your	letters,	you	must	have	had	a	completely	different
and	far	better	timetable.	Tell	me	something	about	it,	dearest,	but	the
truth!	 Nor	 have	 I	 had	 an	 explanation	 for	 the	many	 periodicals	 you
receive—according	to	your	very	first	letter.
I	would	 rather	 not	 tell	 you	 in	 detail	 about	 the	wedding;	 it	would
mean	 describing	 the	 new	 relatives	 and	 their	 friends,	 which	 would
remind	me	too	vividly	of	the	time	so	recently	weathered.	My	cousin’s
name	 is	 Martha;	 she	 has	 a	 number	 of	 good	 qualities,	 among	 them
unpretentiousness,	 to	 which	 alone	 I	 addressed	 myself.	 My	 parents
(here	 I	cannot	 resist	 the	 temptation	 to	call	 them	“my	poor	parents”)
were	delighted	with	the	festivities,	despite	the	ridiculous	sums	which,
to	 their	 distress,	 were	 wasted	 upon	 them.	 Lunch	 over,	 my	 father
always	sits	in	his	rocking	chair	for	a	brief	nap,	after	which	he	leaves
for	the	shop	(he	is	not	allowed	to	lie	down	after	eating	on	account	of
his	heart	condition).	Today	he	was	again	sitting	in	his	rocking	chair	as
usual,	I	thought	he	had	already	gone	to	sleep	(I	was	eating	my	lunch
at	 the	 time),	 when	 suddenly	 in	 his	 drowsiness	 he	 said:	 “Yesterday
someone	told	me	that	in	her	bridal	veil	Valli	looked	like	a	princess.”
But	 he	 said	 it	 in	 Czech,	 and	 the	 love,	 admiration,	 and	 tenderness
combined	 in	 the	 word	 “kněžna”	 simply	 cannot	 be	 conveyed	 by
“princess”—a	word	denoting	nothing	but	pomp	and	circumstance.
Dearest,	you	slightly	misunderstood	my	brother-in-law’s	remark.	 If
there	 were	 the	 remotest	 possibility	 that	 my	 brother-in-law	 was
alluding	to	your	letters,	then	some	malice	in	his	remark	could	not	be



denied.	 But	 he	 is	 the	 last	 person	 to	 know	 anything	whatever	 about
your	letters,	and	any	allusion	to	them	is	impossible.	The	only	allusion
that	 could	 have	 been	 (but	 wasn’t)	 attributed	 to	 my	 brother-in-law,
was	that	I	bothered	as	little	about	my	family	as	if	I	were	abroad,	and
kept	in	touch	with	them	only	by	letter.	So	of	my	true	home	he	knows
nothing.

Franz

From	January	14	to	15,	1913
Dearest,	 while	 I	 have	 been	 writing	 it	 has	 got	 very	 late	 again.	 At
around	 2	 o’clock	 every	 morning	 I	 keep	 remembering	 the	 Chinese
scholar.	Alas,	it	is	not	my	mistress	who	calls	me,	it’s	only	the	letter	I
want	 to	write	 to	her.	You	once	said	you	would	 like	 to	sit	beside	me
while	I	write.	Listen,	in	that	case	I	could	not	write	(I	can’t	do	much,
anyway),	but	in	that	case	I	could	not	write	at	all.	For	writing	means
revealing	 oneself	 to	 excess;	 that	 utmost	 of	 self-revelation	 and
surrender,	in	which	a	human	being,	when	involved	with	others,	would
feel	he	was	losing	himself,	and	from	which,	therefore,	he	will	always
shrink	as	long	as	he	is	in	his	right	mind—for	everyone	wants	to	live	as
long	as	he	is	alive—even	that	degree	of	self-revelation	and	surrender
is	 not	 enough	 for	 writing.	 Writing	 that	 springs	 from	 the	 surface	 of
existence—when	 there	 is	 no	 other	 way	 and	 the	 deeper	 wells	 have
dried	 up—is	 nothing,	 and	 collapses	 the	 moment	 a	 truer	 emotion
makes	that	surface	shake.	This	is	why	one	can	never	be	alone	enough
when	one	writes,	why	there	can	never	be	enough	silence	around	one
when	 one	writes,	 why	 even	 night	 is	 not	 night	 enough.	 This	 is	 why
there	 is	 never	 enough	 time	 at	 one’s	 disposal,	 for	 the	 roads	 are	 long
and	 it	 is	 easy	 to	go	astray,	 there	 are	 even	 times	when	one	becomes
afraid	and	has	the	desire—even	without	any	constraint	or	enticement
—to	run	back	(a	desire	always	severely	punished	later	on),	how	much
more	so	if	one	were	suddenly	to	receive	a	kiss	from	the	most	beloved
lips!	I	have	often	thought	that	the	best	mode	of	life	for	me	would	be
to	 sit	 in	 the	 innermost	 room	 of	 a	 spacious	 locked	 cellar	 with	 my
writing	 things	 and	 a	 lamp.	 Food	would	 be	 brought	 and	 always	 put
down	 far	 away	 from	my	 room,	 outside	 the	 cellar’s	 outermost	 door.
The	 walk	 to	 my	 food,	 in	 my	 dressing	 gown,	 through	 the	 vaulted
cellars,	would	be	my	only	exercise.	 I	would	then	return	to	my	table,
eat	slowly	and	with	deliberation,	then	start	writing	again	at	once.	And



how	 I	would	write!	 From	what	 depths	 I	would	 drag	 it	 up!	Without
effort!	For	extreme	concentration	knows	no	effort.	The	trouble	is	that
I	might	not	be	able	 to	keep	 it	up	 for	 long,	 and	at	 the	 first	 failure—
which	 perhaps	 even	 in	 these	 circumstances	 could	 not	 be	 avoided—
would	 be	 bound	 to	 end	 in	 a	 grandiose	 fit	 of	madness.	What	 do	 you
think,	dearest?	Don’t	be	reticent	with	your	cellar-dweller.

Franz

From	January	15	to	16,	1913
It	 is	still	comparatively	early	today,	but	 I	do	want	to	 lie	down	soon,
for	I	had	to	pay	for	yesterday’s	relatively	good	work	with	headaches
lasting	all	day	(these	headaches	are	actually	an	invention	of	the	past
two	 months,	 if	 not	 entirely	 of	 the	 year	 1913)	 and	 with	 dreams
exploding	 in	 my	 uneasy	 sleep.	 It’s	 a	 long	 time	 since	 I	 managed	 to
write	well	on	two	successive	evenings.	What	a	mass	of	erratic	writing
this	novel	will	be!	Once	the	first	draft	is	completed,	what	a	difficult,
perhaps	impossible,	task	it	will	be	to	bring	the	dead	sections	at	least
partially	to	life!	And	much	that	is	wrong	will	have	to	remain,	for	no
help	is	forthcoming	from	out	of	the	depths.
One	thing	I	forgot	to	ask	yesterday,	although	it	kept	going	around
in	 my	 head.	 What	 is	 the	 meaning	 of	 you	 having	 had	 a	 backache
during	 the	day	and	of	you	not	 feeling	very	well	when	you	wrote	on
Sunday	evening?	Even	on	Sunday	when	you	could	rest,	you	didn’t	feel
well?	 Is	 this	 still	my	 healthy	 girl?	 And	 is	 this	my	 sensible	 girl	who
spends	the	whole	of	Sunday	(so	it	seems,	according	to	your	letter)	at
home	and	at	her	aunt’s	instead	of	going	out	in	the	lovely	winter	air?
Tell	me	about	 it,	dearest,	nothing	but	the	truth!	 I	keep	hearing	your
mother’s	imprecation:	“That	will	be	your	undoing!”	But	if	by	that	she
only	means	your	writing—and	 from	 the	 context	 she	may	mean	only
your	writing—then	for	once	she	is	wrong.	Five	lines	from	my	dearest
one	are	enough	for	me—to	reassure	her,	whisper	it	 in	your	mother’s
ear	one	day	while	she’s	asleep	after	lunch—although	five	lines	may	be
a	tall	order,	 it	doesn’t	make	one’s	“undoing.”	Granted,	 if	 the	dearest
one	writes	long	letters!	But	that,	Mother,	is	not	my	fault;	scolding	for
this	reason	comes	from	the	depth	of	my	heart,	too.	But	perhaps	your
mother	 is	not	 referring	 to	your	writing—in	which	case	 I	don’t	know
what	to	say.
You	 once	 promised	 to	 tell	me	why	 you	 can’t	 give	 up,	 or	 at	 least



curtail,	 your	 work	 with	 the	 professor.	 How	 did	 you	 get	 to	 the
professor	in	the	first	place?
I	will	tell	you	more	about	my	brother-in-law,	also	about	Max,	also
about	Löwy;	after	all,	it	makes	no	difference	to	me	what	I	write	about;
the	 only	 thing	 of	 value	 is	 that	 with	 every	 word	 I	 imagine	 I	 am
touching	you,	dearest.	“Secret	Love”	is	not	being	played	here,	but	now
in	the	middle	of	the	night	our	new	canary,	in	spite	of	being	covered
up,	has	started	to	sing	a	mournful	song.

Franz

January	16,	1913,	Thursday	afternoon
I	am	writing	now,	for	who	knows	how	late	and	how	distracted	I	shall
be	by	 the	 time	I	get	home	this	evening.	Just	 imagine,	 this	evening	 I
am	not—I	have	 seen	 it	 coming	 for	 a	month—staying	 at	home.	 I	 am
regretting	 it	 already,	 and	 if	 I	 stop	 regretting	 it	 for	 as	 much	 as	 15
minutes	during	the	entire	evening	I	shall	be	satisfied.	The	thing	is	that
Buber	 is	 lecturing	 on	 the	 Jewish	 Myth;10	 it	 would	 take	 more	 than
Buber	to	get	me	out	of	my	room,	I	have	heard	him	before,	I	find	him
dreary;	no	matter	what	he	 says,	 something	 is	missing.	 (No	doubt	he
knows	a	lot,	there	were	some	Chinese	stories
(I	didn’t	have	any	blotting	paper,	and	while	waiting	for	the	page	to
dry,	 I	 read	 pages	 600–602	 of	 Education	 [sentimentale],	 which
happened	to	be	lying	here.	Dear	God!	Read	that,	dearest,	do	read	it!
“Elle	 avoua	 qu’elle	 désirait	 faire	 un	 tour	 à	 son	 bras,	 dans	 les	 rues.”
What	a	sentence!	What	construction!	Dearest,	 the	pages	on	which	so
much	is	crossed	out	do	not	represent	nights	lacking	in	creative	power.
These	are	the	very	pages	that	absorbed	him	completely,	 in	which	he
vanished	 from	human	 sight.	And	 even	when	writing	 it	 for	 the	 third
time	he	experienced,	as	you	can	 see	 in	 the	appendix	 to	 this	 edition,
that	infinite	happiness.11)
to	 continue	 in	 parentheses:	 well	 he,	 Buber,	 published	Chinese	 Ghost
and	Love	Stories,12	which	are	wonderful,	at	least	the	ones	I	know.)	But
after	Buber,	Eysoldt13	will	be	reading,	and	it	is	entirely	on	her	account
that	I	am	going.	Have	you	ever	heard	her?	I	saw	her	as	Ophelia	and	as
Faith	 in	 Everyman.14	 I	 am	 completely	 under	 the	 spell	 of	 her
personality	and	her	voice.	I	probably	won’t	turn	up	until	after	Buber’s
lecture.
Yes,	dearest,	the	remark	in	my	Sunday	letter.	It’s	no	use,	I	have	to



mention	it	once	again.	It	is	very	bad,	isn’t	it?	No,	your	reaction	is	not
at	all	peculiar.	Tell	me,	how	can	anything	of	this	sort	happen	to	one?
Dearest,	 I	 ask	 you	 once	 more	 to	 forgive	 me;	 speak	 out,	 allow	 no
bitterness	against	me	to	remain	with	you;	tell	me	once	again	explicitly
that	you	have	forgiven	me,	pour	ink	over	the	remark	and	write	to	say
you	 have	 done	 so.	 I	 shall	 breathe	 a	 sigh	 of	 relief.	What	 demon	 can
have	guided	my	hand	at	the	time!

Past	 3	 o’clock,	 Felice,	 just	 imagine.	 Seen	 a	 lot,	 heard	 a	 certain
amount,	 nothing	 worth	 sacrificing	 any	 sleep	 for.	 Goodnight,	 my
dearest.	How	peacefully	you	sleep,	and	he	who	belongs	to	you	keeps
wandering	 about	 in	 the	 distance.	 Do	 you	 appreciate	 cards	 like	 the
enclosed?	The	naked	one	in	the	corner	of	the	picture	is	Ottla.

Franz

[IN	THE	MARGIN]	I	must	have	this	picture	back,	I	stole	it	from	Ottla.
From	January	17	to	18,	1913

After	 a	 long	 time,	 dearest,	 I	 have	 once	more	 spent	 a	 pleasant	 hour
reading.	Never	would	 you	 guess	what	 I	 read,	 and	what	 gave	me	 so
much	pleasure.	 It	was	 an	old	 set	 of	 the	Gartenlaube15	 from	 the	year
1863.	 I	 didn’t	 read	 anything	 in	 particular,	 but	 slowly	 thumbed
through	200	pages,	 looked	at	 the	 illustrations	 (at	 that	 time	still	 rare
on	account	of	the	cost	of	reproduction),	and	read	something	of	special
interest	 only	 here	 and	 there.	 Again	 and	 again	 I	 am	 drawn	 into	 the
past,	and	the	pleasure	of	experiencing	human	circumstances	and	ways
of	 thinking	 in	 a	 finished	 yet	 still	 perfectly	 intelligible	manner	 (God
knows,	1863	is	only	50	years	ago)	and	yet	no	longer	being	capable	of
absorbing	 them	 instinctively	 in	 every	 detail	 from	within,	 thus	 being
faced	 with	 the	 necessity	 of	 toying	 with	 them	 according	 to	 one’s
inclination	and	mood—for	me,	this	contradictory	pleasure	is	immense.
I	always	like	reading	old	newspapers	and	periodicals.	And	then	there
is	this	ancient,	heart-stirring,	expectant	Germany	of	the	middle	of	the
last	 century.	The	 confined	 conditions,	 the	proximity	 each	 felt	 to	 the
other,	 editor	 to	 subscriber,	 author	 to	 reader,	 the	 reader	 to	 the	 great
poets	 of	 the	 time	 (Uhland,	 Jean	 Paul,	 Seume,	 Rückert—“Germany’s
Bard	and	Brahmin”16).
I	have	written	nothing	today,	and	the	moment	I	put	the	book	down

I	am	promptly	assailed	by	the	insecurity	that	follows	my	not	writing



like	an	evil	spirit.	Only	a	good	spirit	could	drive	it	away,	and	it	would
have	to	be	very	close	to	me	and	give	me	a	solemn	pledge	that	the	loss
of	one	evening	when	I	wrote	nothing	(hence	nothing	bad	either)	is	not
irreparable	(as	in	fact	it	isn’t,	but	it	would	have	to	come	from	the	lips
which	 now	 on	 Sunday	 morning	 keep	 smiling	 at	 these	 lines,	 and	 in
which	 I	 put	 all	 my	 trust),	 and	 that	 as	 a	 result	 of	 that	 one	 wasted
evening	I	would	not	lose,	deeply	problematic	though	it	is,	my	capacity
for	writing	which,	 all	 alone	 at	my	 table	 (in	 the	heated	 living	 room,
little	housewife),	 I	 so	 greatly	 fear.	 I	was	 too	 tired	 to	write	 (actually
not	too	tired,	but	apprehensive	of	great	tiredness—well,	it’s	1	o’clock
now);	I	didn’t	get	home	till	3	yesterday,	but	even	then	sleep	would	not
come	for	a	 long	 time,	and	quite	 innocently	 the	5th	hour	rang	 in	my
horribly	 alert	 ear.	 But	 again	 tomorrow	 there	 will	 be	 another
interruption,	 admittedly	 also	 long	 foreseen,	 for	 in	 the	 evening	 I	 am
going—yes,	 it’s	 true—to	 the	 theater.	Thus	 the	 entertainments	 follow
one	another,	but	this	will	be	the	last	for	a	long	time.	It	must	be	a	year
since	 I	went	 to	 the	 theater,	 and	 I	won’t	 be	 going	 again	 for	 another
year;	but	tomorrow	the	Russian	Ballet	will	be	here.	I	saw	it	once	two
years	ago,	and	dreamed	about	it	for	months,	above	all	about	one	very
wild	 dancer,	 Eduardova.17	 She	 won’t	 be	 here;	 very	 likely	 she	 was
considered	an	unimportant	lady	anyway;	the	great	Karsavina18	won’t
be	here	either	(she	has	been	taken	ill,	to	spite	me),	but	there	is	still	a
great	deal	 left.	You	once	mentioned	 the	Russian	Ballet	 in	 a	 letter;	 a
discussion	about	the	Russian	Ballet	had	taken	place	at	the	office.	What
was	it	about?	And	what	is	this	tango-dance	you	danced?	Is	that	really
its	 name?	 Is	 it	 something	Mexican?	Why	 is	 there	 no	 picture	 of	 this
dance?	 More	 beautiful	 dancing	 than	 that	 of	 the	 Russians,	 more
beautiful	 dancing	 than	 individual	 movements,	 now	 and	 then	 by
individual	dancers,	I	have	seen	only	at	Dalcroze’s.19	Have	you	seen	a
performance	of	his	Institute	in	Berlin?	I	believe	they	dance	there	quite
often.
But	why	mingle	with	dancers,	far	better	go	to	bed;	but	before	I	do,
Felice,	 lay	your	head	on	my	breast,	which	needs	you	so	much	more
than	you	can	imagine.	There	 is	so	much	more	to	say	and	to	answer,
but	the	mass	of	things	to	be	said	is	far	greater	and	more	complicated
than	 the	 actual	 distance	 between	 us,	 and	 both	 appear	 to	 be
insurmountable.
I’ve	just	been	wondering	how	it	would	be	if	your	mother,	as	a	great
surprise,	 said	 something	 friendly	when	 handing	 you	 this	 letter?	 But
perhaps	this	is	impossible;	the	letter	doesn’t	deserve	any	friendliness;



perhaps	 it	 brings	 you	 nothing	 good,	 although	 on	 the	 whole
circumference	of	this	earth	there	is	nothing	it	would	rather	do,	and	it
ought	to	be	grateful	to	be	allowed	to	reach	your	hands.

Franz

By	mistake	I	have	just	written	the	number	of	my	house	instead	of
yours	 on	 the	 envelope,	 and	 around	me	 in	 a	 circle	 seven	 empty
chairs	were	watching.
How	can	this	be	explained?	Your	mother	spends	the	evening	in
the	 living	 room,	while	 your	 father	 reads	 in	 his	 bedroom?	What
does	your	mother	do	alone	in	the	living	room?
And	another	thing.	 I	assume	your	office	hours	 in	summer	and
winter	 are	 different,	 since	 you	 say	 that	 on	 Friday	 afternoons	 in
summer	you	go	 to	 the	 synagogue.	 (In	 the	past	 few	years	 I	have
been	to	the	synagogue	only	twice—to	my	sisters’	weddings.)
I	thought	you	were	joking	about	the	mice.	So	they	really	exist?
Poor	child!

[PICTURE	POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Prague,	January	19,	1913]

Got	home	at	3:30.	Morning	greetings	here	and	there!
FK

Sunday,	January	19,	1913,	afternoon,	a	bad	hour.
Dearest,	no,	you	shouldn’t	write	the	way	you	did	in	the	last	letter	but
one.	I	know	you	cross	it	all	out	in	today’s	letter,	but	still,	it	was	put	on
paper,	 and	 for	 24	hours	 I	 carried	 it	 around	 inside	myself.	 For	 don’t
you	know	what	I	am	bound	to	read	into	these	things?	Don’t	you	know
how	weak	and	wretched	and	dependent	I	am	on	the	moment?	Above
all	when,	as	now,	it	is	four	days	since	I	wrote	anything	for	myself.	You
have	some	idea,	dearest,	certainly,	or	I	shouldn’t	feel	so	close	to	you;
nevertheless	 I	 am	going	 to	make	 a	 special	 point	 of	writing	 it	 down:
When	I	had	read	yesterday’s	 letter,	 I	said	to	myself:	“Well,	here	 it	 is
on	paper,	you	haven’t	even	enough	steadfastness	and	self-assurance	to
satisfy	 Felice,	 who	 certainly	 makes	 many	 more	 allowances	 for	 you
than	 others	 would.	 But	 if	 you	 don’t	 even	 satisfy	 her,	 how	 can	 you
possibly	satisfy	anyone	else?	And	what	you	wrote	at	the	time,	and	to
which	Felice	is	replying	now,	really	came	straight	from	the	heart.	You



need	 that	 cellar,	 even	 if	 today	 for	 instance	 it	 seems	 that	not	 even	a
cellar	could	help	you.20	Doesn’t	Felice	appreciate	this	need?	Can’t	she
appreciate	 it?	 Doesn’t	 she	 know	 the	 vast	 number	 of	 things	 you	 are
incapable	of?	And	doesn’t	she	know	that	if	you	live	in	the	cellar	even
that	cellar	belongs	unconditionally	to	her?	(Though	indeed	one	has	to
admit	 that	 a	 cellar,	 and	 nothing	 but	 a	 cellar,	 is	 a	 sad	 possession.)”
Dearest,	my	dearest,	don’t	you	really	know	all	this?	But	if	so,	dearest,
what	a	lot	of	pain	I	shall	have	to	inflict	upon	you,	even	if	everything
were	 to	 turn	 out	 as	 favorably	 as	 in	 certain	 dreams.	 And	 the	 more
favorable,	the	more	pain.	Have	I	the	right	to	do	this?	And	even	if	self-
preservation	 demands	 it	 of	me?	 There	 are	 times	when	 impossibility
swamps	possibility	like	a	wave.
Don’t	 underestimate,	 dearest,	 the	 steadfastness	 of	 that	 Chinese
woman!21	 Until	 the	 early	 morning—I	 don’t	 remember	 whether	 the
hour	is	specified—she	lay	awake	in	her	bed,	the	glow	of	the	reading
lamp	kept	her	awake,	but	she	remained	quiet;	perhaps	by	her	glances
she	 tried	 to	 divert	 the	 scholar’s	 attention	 from	 his	 book,	 but	 the
unhappy	man,	though	greatly	devoted	to	her,	didn’t	notice;	God	only
knows	how	many	sad	reasons	he	had	for	not	noticing,	reasons	beyond
his	 control	 but	 which	 altogether,	 in	 a	 higher	 sense,	 were	 again
devoted	only	 to	her.	But	 finally	 she	could	no	 longer	contain	herself,
and	did	take	the	lamp	away	from	him,	which	after	all	was	quite	right,
beneficial	 to	 his	 health,	 one	 hopes	 not	 harmful	 to	 his	 studies,
conducive	to	love,	which	inspired	a	beautiful	poem,	and	yet,	all	things
considered,	was	mere	self-deception	on	the	woman’s	part.
Dearest,	take	me	to	you,	hold	me,	don’t	lose	faith;	the	days	cast	me
back	and	forth;	you	must	realize	that	you	will	never	get	unadulterated
happiness	from	me;	only	as	much	unadulterated	suffering	as	one	could
wish	for,	and	yet—don’t	send	me	away.	I	am	tied	to	you	not	by	love
alone,	love	would	not	be	much,	love	begins,	 love	comes,	passes,	and
comes	 again;	 but	 this	 need,	 by	which	 I	 am	 utterly	 chained	 to	 your
being,	this	remains.	So	you	too,	dearest,	must	remain.	And	don’t	write
any	more	letters	like	the	last	but	one.
I	 have	 not	 gone	 back	 to	 my	 novel	 lately,	 not	 since	 Thursday
evening,	and	won’t	today,	either.	I	shall	have	to	spend	the	afternoon
with	Max	 and	with	Werfel,	who	 is	 returning	 to	 Leipzig	 tomorrow.	 I
like	that	young	man	better	every	day.	I	also	talked	to	Buber	yesterday;
as	a	person	he	is	lively	and	simple	and	remarkable,	and	seems	to	have
no	 connection	with	 the	 tepid	 things	 he	 has	written.	 Final	 item:	 last
night	 the	Russians	were	magnificent.	Nijinsky22	and	Kyast23	 are	 two



flawless	 human	beings;	 they	 are	 at	 the	 innermost	 point	 of	 their	 art;
they	radiate	mastery,	as	do	all	such	people.
But	however	that	may	be,	as	from	tomorrow	evening	I	am	not	going
to	stir	from	home	again	for	a	long	time.	Yes,	perhaps	it	was	just	this
loafing	about	that	has	brought	anxiety	to	my	dearest	one.	At	precisely
the	 time	 that	 your	 letter	 was	 written	 I	 was	 with	 the	 people	 who
gathered	 around	 Buber	 and	 Eysoldt	 after	 the	 lecture,	 and	 in	 my
enjoyment	 of	 the	 spurious	 pleasure	 of	 being	 away	 from	 home	 for
once,	I	behaved	in	a	somewhat	exaggerated	and	conspicuous	fashion.
If	 only	 I	 were	 back	 again	with	my	 tale!24	 If	 only	my	 beloved	were
calm	 again,	 and	 resolved	 once	 more	 to	 take	 up	 the	 unhappiness	 I
cause	her	and	which	for	a	moment	she	laid	down!

Franz

What	 did	 your	mother	 say	when	 handing	 you	 the	 letter?	What
does	 your	 father	 write?	 When	 are	 you	 moving?	 I	 shall	 answer
your	questions	about	Meditation	before	long.	I	wrote	well	for	one
day,	 not	 two.	Only	one	 in	 the	whole	week!	And	you	 still	won’t
allow	me	the	cellar!

January	19,	1913
Now,	my	poor	dearest	(when	things	are	not	well	with	me,	I	call	you
“poor	dearest,”	 thus	 I	wish	more	 than	anything	else	 to	make	myself
part	of	you	with	all	my	misfortunes,	you	truly	poor	dearest),	I	arrived
home	as	tired	as	a	chicken,	with	nothing	in	my	head	but	the	buzz	of
sleepiness,	to	find	once	more	a	party	going	on	in	the	other	room.	And
instead	of	retiring	so	as	to	get	up	in	the	quiet	of	midnight,	to	eat,	and
then	 to	 write	 some	 nice,	 apologetic	 (is	 there	 anything	 I	 have	 to
apologize	 for,	 dearest?	 I	 never	 know	 and	 almost	 always	 think	 there
is),	 wholly	 conciliatory	 word	 to	 you,	 I	 shall,	 since	 there	 is	 no
alternative,	 combine	 the	 noise	with	my	 supper,	 and	 then	 go	 to	 bed
very	soon,	if	possible	before	10	o’clock.

Well,	 now	 I	 have	 escaped	 to	 you	 again.	 Next	 door	my	 sister	 and	 a
cousin	are	still	talking	about	their	children;	my	mother	and	Ottla	keep
interrupting	 them;	 my	 father,	 my	 brother-in-law,	 and	 the	 cousin’s
husband	are	playing	cards;	amidst	the	laughter,	jeering,	screams,	and
slamming	 of	 cards,	 my	 father	 occasionally	 interrupts	 to	 imitate	 his
grandson,	while	high	above	them	all	sings	the	canary,	which	is	quite



young,	belongs	to	Valli,	 is	living	with	us	for	the	time	being,	and	has
not	yet	learned	to	distinguish	night	from	day.
This	has	been	a	bad	Sunday	for	me,	I	am	dissatisfied,	and	the	noise
next	 door	 is	 a	 fitting	 conclusion.	 And	 tomorrow	 the	 office	 again,
where	 I	 had	 a	 number	 of	 particular	 unpleasantnesses	 on	 Saturday,
apart	 from	 the	 general	 permanent	 ones,	 and	 no	 doubt	 they	 will
resume	tomorrow	as	soon	as	I	set	foot	in	the	office.	And	still	so	far	to
go	before	tomorrow	evening!	Dearest,	I	would	so	much	like	to	know
details	 about	your	office	work.	 (By	 the	way,	why	don’t	 I	 get	a	 sales
letter?	 And	 what	 was	 the	 result	 of	 these	 letters?)	 For	 instance,	 the
foreman	who	calls	you	to	the	factory,	what	does	he	want?	What	kind
of	things	do	people	telephone	to	you	about?	What	sort	of	questions	do
the	little	ones	ask?	Where	do	you	have	to	go	in	connection	with	your
work?	Who	 is	Herr	Hartstein?	 Is	 there	a	public	phonograph	shop	on
Friedrichstrasse	yet?	If	not,	when	are	you	going	to	have	one	installed?
Which	reminds	me,	I	have	yet	another	business	idea	for	you.	In	hotels
a	Parlograph	should	be	at	the	disposal	of	guests	in	the	same	way	as	a
telephone.	Don’t	you	agree?	Just	 try	 to	 introduce	 that!	How	proud	 I
would	be	 if	 it	were	to	succeed.	 I	would	then	have	1000	other	 ideas.
And	wouldn’t	I	be	obliged	to,	since	I	am	allowed	to	sit	in	your	office?
Would	 it	 be	 so	 remarkable	 if,	 after	 letting	 my	 head	 rest	 on	 your
shoulder	 all	 day,	 I	 had	 by	 the	 evening	 some	 minor	 and	 probably
ridiculous,	or	long	since	practiced,	business	idea?

Franz

From	January	20	to	21,	1913
During	the	day,	dearest,	the	distance	between	Prague	and	Berlin	is	as
it	is	in	reality;	but	from	about	9	P.M.	on	it	expands,	it	expands	to	the
point	 of	 improbability.	 And	 yet	 it	 is	 in	 the	 evening	 that	 I	 can	 best
judge	what	you	are	doing.	You	dine,	drink	 tea,	 talk	 to	your	mother;
you	then	take	up	your	position	of	martyrdom	in	bed,	write	to	me,	and
go	 to	 sleep	 peacefully,	 I	 hope.	 Is	 tea	 good	 for	 you?	 Doesn’t	 it
overstimulate	 you?	 To	 drink	 this	 overstimulating	 drink	 every	 night!
My	 attitude	 to	 the	 food	 and	 drink	which	 I	myself	 never,	 or	 only	 in
dire	need,	eat	or	drink,	 is	not	as	might	be	expected.	There’s	nothing
I’d	rather	see	eaten	than	these	things.	If	I	am	sitting	at	a	table	with	10
friends	all	drinking	black	coffee,	 the	sight	of	 it	gives	me	a	feeling	of
happiness.	Meat	can	be	steaming	around	me,	mugs	of	beer	drained	in



huge	drafts,	those	juicy	Jewish	sausages	(at	least	here	in	Prague	that’s
what	 they	 are	 like,	 plump	 as	 water	 rats)	 can	 be	 cut	 up	 by	 every
relative	all	 over	 the	place	 (the	 sound	of	 the	 taut	 sausage	 skin	being
cut	has	rung	in	my	ears	since	childhood)—all	this	and	worse	gives	me
no	sensation	of	distaste	whatever;	on	the	contrary,	it	does	me	a	great
deal	of	good.	There	is	no	question	of	my	taking	a	malicious	pleasure
in	it	(I	don’t	even	believe	in	the	absolute	harmfulness	of	harmful	food;
anyone	tempted	by	these	sausages	would	be	a	fool	not	to	succumb	to
the	 desire),	 it	 is	 rather	 a	 calm,	 a	 calm	without	 envy	 at	 the	 sight	 of
other	 people’s	 delight,	 and	 at	 the	 same	 time	 admiration	 for	 a	 taste
natural	 to	 my	 closest	 relatives	 and	 friends,	 yet	 so	 utterly
incomprehensible	to	me.	But	all	this	has	no	relevance	to	my	fears	that
tea—especially	 when	 you	 have	 to	 work	 so	 hard	 during	 the	 day	 on
account	 of	 the	 billing	 clerk’s	 illness—could	 do	 you	 harm,	 if	 for	 no
other	 reason	 than	 by	 interfering	with	 the	 sleep	which	 you	 so	 badly
need.	In	general	I	also	like	tea,	and	I	became	absolutely	absorbed	in
your	description	of	your	sister’s	evening	meal.	But	how	would	it	be	if
instead	of	 tea	you	were	to	drink	milk,	as—if	 I	remember	correctly—
you	originally	promised	your	parents.	The	food	at	the	office	is	not	up
to	much	either,	as	you	yourself	admit.	And	mornings	and	afternoons
you	eat	nothing	whatever?
It	really	is	strange	that	you	should	have	bought	Buber’s	book.25	Do
you	buy	books	regularly,	or	according	to	your	mood,	and	then	a	book
as	 expensive	 as	 that?	 I	 know	 it	 only	 from	 an	 extensive	 review
containing	various	quotations.	I	can’t	imagine	that	it	could	in	any	way
remind	 one	 of	 Casanova.	 You	 also	 say	 “his”	 style;	 surely	 it	 is	 a
translation?	Or	could	it	be	the	kind	of	drastic	adaptation	that	makes
his	books	of	legends	so	intolerable	to	me?26
Yes,	Werfel	was	 here	 for	 a	month.	 Good	 old	 loafer	 that	 he	 is,	 he
transferred	from	Leipzig	to	Prague	for	a	month.	He	also	gave	a	public
lecture	here.	But	it	was	on	the	eve	of	the	wedding,	and	at	that	time	I
felt	more	like	being	buried	than	leaving	the	house.
I	 am	 so	 glad	 you	 found	 Ottla	 attractive.	 You	 are	 right,	 she	 is
enormously	 tall,	 she	 takes	 after	 our	 father’s	 family,	 which	 has
produced	some	powerful	giants.	The	other	naked	one	is	Valli,	whom	I
don’t	expect	you	recognized.
But	 now	 goodnight,	 dearest.	 It’s	 late.	 Behind	me	 the	 canary	 sings
sadly	and	incessantly.

Franz



[LETTERHEAD:	Workers’	Accident	Insurance	Institute]
January	21,	1913,	2:30	P.M.

Dearest,	thank	you	very	much	for	your	letter.	I	had	been	sad	without
any	good	reason.	I	am	after	all	 the	most	 inconsistent	person	I	know,
and	if	 I	did	not	 love	you	once	and	for	all,	 I	would	 love	you	anyway
simply	for	being	unafraid	of	 this	 inconsistency.	The	example	of	your
Aunt	 Klara	 is	 most	 appropriate	 today;	 I	 am	 more	 or	 less	 like	 that.
Except	that	I’m	not	an	aunt,	from	whom	one	may	suffer	such	things.
This	morning	before	getting	up	and	after	a	very	fitful	night’s	sleep,	I
was	 so	 sad	 that	 in	 my	 sadness	 I	 longed	 not	 to	 throw	 myself	 (that
would	have	been	too	high-spirited	for	my	sadness)	but	to	spill	myself
out	of	the	window.
But	now	that	I	have	your	letter	I	hasten	to	propose	to	you,	dearest,
that	we	never	again	hold	anything	against	each	other,	since	neither	of
us	 can	 be	 held	 responsible.	 The	 distance	 is	 so	 great,	 the	 perpetual
overcoming	 of	 it	 so	 tormenting,	 that	 one	 sometimes	 lets	 oneself	 go
and	for	a	moment	cannot	pull	oneself	 together.	Then	add	to	this	my
wretched	 disposition	 which	 knows	 but	 three	 possibilities:	 to	 burst
forth,	collapse,	or	pine	away.	And	my	life	consists	of	a	succession	of
these	 three	 possibilities.	 My	 poor	 admirable	 dearest,	 who	 has	 got
herself	involved	in	such	a	turmoil!	I	belong	to	you	entirely;	this	much
I	can	say	as	a	result	of	surveying	my	30	years	of	life.

Franz

From	January	21	to	22,	1913
My	poor	dearest,	 since	 that	Chinese	poem27	has	acquired	 such	great
meaning	for	us,	there	is	one	thing	I	have	to	ask	you.	Didn’t	you	notice
that	it	was	specifically	about	the	scholar’s	mistress,	and	not	his	wife,
although	 the	 scholar	 is	 undoubtedly	 an	 elderly	 man,	 and	 the
combination	 of	 scholarship	 and	 age	 would	 seem	 to	 contradict	 the
presence	 of	 a	mistress.	 But	 the	 poet,	 ruthlessly	 striving	 only	 for	 the
final	situation,	ignores	this	improbability.	Was	it	because	he	preferred
the	 improbability	 to	 an	 impossibility?	 And	 if	 not,	 was	 it	 perhaps
because	he	feared	that	a	like	confrontation	of	the	scholar	with	his	wife
might	rob	the	poem	of	all	its	gaiety,	and	create	in	the	reader	nothing
but	 sympathy	 for	 the	woman’s	misery?	 The	mistress	 in	 the	 poem	 is
not	too	badly	off;	this	time	the	lamp	really	does	go	out,	it	was	not	too
much	 trouble,	 and	 there	 is	 still	 plenty	 of	 fun	 left	 in	 her.	 But	 how



would	it	be	had	it	been	his	wife,	and	that	night	not	just	any	night	but
a	 sample	 of	 all	 nights,	 and	 then	 of	 course	 not	 only	 of	 nights	 but	 of
their	whole	 life	 together,	 a	 life	 that	would	be	a	battle	 for	 the	 lamp.
Could	 any	 reader	 smile	 at	 that?	 The	mistress	 in	 the	 poem	 is	 in	 the
wrong	 because	 she	 gains	 a	 victory	 at	 the	 time,	 and	wants	 no	more
than	 a	 single	 victory;	 but	 because	 she	 is	 beautiful	 and	wants	 but	 a
single	 victory,	 and	 no	 scholar	 could	 ever	 be	 convincing	 in	 a	 single
attempt,	even	the	severest	of	readers	will	forgive	her.	A	wife,	on	the
other	 hand,	 would	 always	 be	 in	 the	 right;	 she	 would	 claim	 not	 a
victory	but	her	existence,	which	the	man	poring	over	his	books	cannot
give	her,	even	though	he	is	perhaps	only	pretending	to	be	looking	at
the	books,	while	for	days	and	nights	on	end	he	thinks	of	nothing	but
his	 wife	 whom	 he	 loves	 above	 all	 else,	 but	 loves	 with	 his	 inherent
inadequacy.	Here	the	mistress	undoubtedly	has	a	sharper	eye	than	the
wife,	 for	 she	 is	 not	 completely	 immersed	 in	 the	 situation;	 she	keeps
her	 head	 above	 it.	 But	 the	wife,	 poor	 unhappy	 creature	 that	 she	 is,
fights	blindly	on;	she	cannot	see	what	stares	her	in	the	face;	and	what
is	really	a	wall	she	secretly	believes	to	be	but	a	stretched	rope,	under
which	one	will	somehow	be	able	to	crawl	through.	At	least	that’s	how
it	 is	 in	 my	 parents’	 marriage,	 though	 the	 causes	 involved	 are	 very
different	from	those	in	the	Chinese	poem.
However,	not	every	Chinese	poem	in	my	collection	 is	as	 favorable
to	 the	 scholar	 as	 this	 one,	 and	 he	 is	 called	 “scholar”	 only	 in	 those
poems	 that	are	kind	about	him;	elsewhere	he	 is	 called	“bookworm.”
Then	he	is	compared	to	the	“fearless	traveler,”	the	war	hero	who	wins
victories	over	dangerous	mountain	tribes.	It	 is	a	wife	who	awaits	his
return,	 no	 doubt	 anxiously,	 but	 overjoyed	 at	 the	 sight	 of	 him;	 they
look	into	each	other’s	eyes	like	a	devoted	couple	who	love	each	other
and	have	 the	 right	 to	 love	each	other;	 there	are	no	sidelong	glances
like	those	of	the	mistress	when,	from	the	goodness	and	the	bidding	of
her	heart,	 she	 is	watching	 the	 scholar.	Moreover,	 there	 are	 children
who	 wait	 and	 skip	 around	 the	 returning	 father,	 while	 the
“bookworm’s”	home	is	empty;	there	are	no	children	there.
Dearest,	what	a	dreadful	poem	that	is,	I	hadn’t	realized	it.	Perhaps,
since	it	can	be	opened	up,	it	can	also	be	crushed	under	foot	and	left
behind;	human	life	has	many	levels;	the	eye	sees	but	one	possibility,
but	 in	 the	 heart	 all	 possibilities	 are	 present.	 What	 do	 you	 think,
dearest?

Franz



[LETTERHEAD:	Workers’	Accident	Insurance	Institute]
January	22,	1913

Again	two	letters,	dearest;	aren’t	you	afraid?	For	don’t	you	realize	that
after	a	spell	of	two	letters	a	day	we	invariably	have	a	total	collapse?
Provided,	of	 course,	we	haven’t	 collapsed	already,	 in	which	case	we
can	only	be	thankful	that	no	one	is	watching,	for	how	very	ashamed
we	 would	 have	 to	 be!	 By	 the	 way,	 what	 happened	 to	 your	 lunch
yesterday?	I	 looked	for	 it	 in	vain	between	the	 lines.	Could	you	have
skipped	it?	But	that	would	be	dreadful!	Yes,	do	send	me	the	new	list
of	references!	Of	course.	I	throw	myself	upon	everything	done	by	you.
Nebble	doesn’t	like	the	list?	One	of	these	days	we	shall	really	have	to
give	him	a	spanking.	Listen,	this	evening	(it’s	too	late	now)	I’ll	tell	you
about	 a	 new	business	 idea	 that	 should	 stir	 up	 your	 office.	 Farewell,
dearest,	 a	 certain	person	 is	hurrying	off	 to	 lunch,	and	demands	 that
you	do	the	same.

Franz

From	January	22	to	23,	1913
Very	late,	dearest,	and	yet	I	shall	go	to	bed	without	deserving	it.	Well,
I	won’t	 sleep	 anyway,	 only	 dream.	As	 I	 did	 yesterday,	 for	 example,
when	in	my	dream	I	ran	toward	a	bridge	or	some	balustrading,	seized
two	telephone	receivers28	 that	happened	 to	be	 lying	on	 the	parapet,
put	 them	 to	 my	 ears,	 and	 kept	 asking	 for	 nothing	 but	 news	 from
“Pontus”;	 but	 nothing	whatever	 came	 out	 of	 the	 telephone	 except	 a
sad,	 mighty,	 wordless	 song	 and	 the	 roar	 of	 the	 sea.	 Although	 well
aware	 that	 it	 was	 impossible	 for	 human	 voices	 to	 penetrate	 these
sounds,	I	didn’t	give	in,	and	didn’t	go	away.
For	the	past	three	days	I	have	written	very	little	of	my	novel,	and
that	 little	 I	wrote	with	 such	 skill	 as	might	 perhaps	 be	 adequate	 for
chopping	 wood,	 not	 even	 for	 chopping	 wood,	 at	 best	 for	 playing
cards.	 Well,	 just	 lately	 (this	 is	 not	 a	 self-reproach,	 rather	 a	 self-
consolation)	 I	 have	 dragged	 myself	 out	 of	 writing	 by	 my	 feet,	 and
must	now	bore	my	way	back	in	with	my	head.
Dearest,	you	are	crying?	Do	you	know	what	that	means?	It	means
you	despair	of	me.	Do	you	really?	No,	dearest,	don’t	do	that.	You	must
know	from	experience	that	with	me	it	goes	around	in	a	circle.	In	one
particular,	continually	recurring	spot	I	stumble	and	scream.	Don’t	leap
to	my	assistance	(by	the	way,	can	you	read	my	writing?	A	somewhat



belated	question),	don’t	get	upset;	I	am	up	again,	as	erect	as	I	can	be.
Don’t	 cry,	dearest!	Anyway	 I	 should	have	known	 that	you	had	been
crying,	 even	 if	 you	 hadn’t	 told	 me;	 I	 did	 torment	 you,	 like	 a	 Red
Indian	his	enemy,	perhaps	even	in	yesterday’s	 letter.	Mercy,	dearest,
mercy!	Perhaps,	 dearest,	 you	 secretly	 think	 that	 because	 of	my	 love
for	you	 I	might	control	my	moods	 so	 far	as	you	are	concerned.	Yes,
but	how	do	you	know,	dearest,	that	I	didn’t	do	just	that,	and	with	all
my	strength,	ludicrous	as	this	may	be?
Shall	I	go	to	bed	now,	or	first	tell	you	my	business	ideas?	No,	I	will

tell	you	now;	every	day	they	are	not	carried	out	is	a	day	wasted.	Just
listen	to	the	progress	I	am	making	here,	too.	The	other	day	I	suggested
introducing	 a	 hall	 for	 music,	 and	 now	 it	 appears	 that	 2	 have	 been
operating	 in	Berlin	 for	years.	 (But	 that	 there	 should	be	one	 in	every
large	town	is	really	not	very	nice.)	Then	I	made	the	suggestion	about
the	hotels,	which	now	turns	out	to	be	first	of	all	bad,	and	secondly	out
of	 date.	 Still,	 it	 was	 tried	 only	 6	 months	 ago;	 perhaps	 today’s
suggestions	were	carried	out	only	3	months	ago,	 in	which	case	 I	am
gradually	approaching	the	present.
However,	instead	of	abandoning	hope	about	the	hotels,	one	should,

as	a	keen	businessman,	make	renewed	attempts	now,	at	the	end	of	the
6	 months.	 Did	 some	 hotels	 actually	 buy	 Parlographs?	 Anyway,	 it
mightn’t	 be	 a	 bad	 gamble	 to	 put	 a	 Parlograph	 at	 the	 disposal	 of
certain	hotels	free	of	charge,	thereby	forcing	others	to	provide	them.
For	as	a	rule	hotels	are	wildly	competitive.
Well,	my	new	ideas:
1.	 Organize	 a	 typing	 bureau	 where	 everything	 dictated	 into
Lindström’s	 Parlographs	 is	 transcribed	 on	 a	 typewriter,	 at	 cost
price,	 or	 at	 first	 perhaps	 slightly	 below	 cost	 price.	 Perhaps	 the
whole	 thing	 could	 be	 made	 even	 cheaper	 by	 contacting	 a
typewriter	manufacturer,	who	would	undoubtedly	offer	favorable
terms	for	the	sake	of	advertisement	and	competition.
2.	 Invent	 a	 Parlograph	 (issue	 orders	 to	 the	 foremen,	 dearest)	 that
takes	 dictation	 only	 after	 the	 insertion	 of	 a	 coin.	 These
Parlographs	 will	 then	 be	 installed	 wherever	 automats,
mutoscopes,29	etc.,	are	to	be	found	today.	As	on	mailboxes,	each
Parlograph	will	show	the	time	at	which	the	dictation,	turned	into
typescript,	 will	 be	 taken	 to	 the	 post	 office.	 I	 can	 already	 see
Lindström	 Inc.’s	 small	 motorcars	 collecting	 the	 used	 rolls	 from
these	Parlographs	and	inserting	new	ones.



3.	 Contact	 the	 Reich	 Post	 Office	 Department	 and	 install	 these
Parlographs	at	all	major	post	offices.

4.	These	machines,	moreover,	will	be	 installed	 in	all	places	where
one	might	have	the	time	and	inclination	to	write,	but	which	lack
the	 necessary	 peace	 and	 comfort—i.e.,	 in	 railway	 carriages,	 on
ships,	 in	 Zeppelins,	 in	 trams	 (when	 on	 one’s	 way	 to	 the
professor).	 In	 your	 hotel	 questionnaire,	 have	 you	 paid	 special
attention	to	summer	resort	hotels,	where	businessmen,	quivering
with	anxiety,	would	besiege	the	Parlographs?

5.	 Invent	 a	 combination	 of	 telephone	 and	 Parlograph.	 This	 really
can’t	be	too	difficult.	The	day	after	tomorrow,	of	course,	you	will
tell	me	that	this	has	already	been	accomplished	successfully.	But
it	 really	 would	 be	 of	 immense	 importance	 for	 the	 press,	 news
agencies,	etc.	More	difficult,	but	surely	quite	possible,	would	be	a
combination	of	gramophone	and	telephone.	More	difficult,	simply
because	one	can’t	understand	a	word	the	gramophone	says,	and	a
Parlograph	 can’t	 very	 well	 ask	 for	 clearer	 pronunciation.	 A
combination	of	gramophone	and	telephone	would	not	be	of	such
great	 universal	 importance;	 it	 would	 only	 be	 a	 relief	 to	 people
who,	 like	 me,	 are	 afraid	 of	 the	 telephone.	 People	 like	 me,
however,	are	equally	afraid	of	the	gramophone,	so	for	them	there
is	 no	 help	whatever.	Here,	 by	 the	way,	 is	 a	 rather	 nice	 idea:	 a
Parlograph	goes	to	the	telephone	in	Berlin,	while	a	gramophone
does	 likewise	 in	 Prague,	 and	 these	 two	 carry	 on	 a	 little
conversation	 with	 each	 other.	 But	 dearest,	 the	 combination	 of
Parlograph	and	telephone	simply	must	be	invented.

Heavens,	 it	 really	 has	 got	 late!	 I	 sacrifice	 my	 nights	 to	 your
business.	Answer	me	in	detail,	not	necessarily	all	at	once,	or	I	would
overflow	with	 ideas.	And	not	 two	 letters	a	day,	dearest!	And	have	a
proper	 lunch!	And	be	calm!	Don’t	cry!	Don’t	despair!	Consider	me	a
madman	whose	madness	may	 still	 be	 in	 the	 balance!	 And	 seriously
now,	“Goodnight!”	and	a	kiss,	helpless	with	love.

Franz

From	January	23	to	24,	1913
Nothing,	 nothing,	 the	whole	 long	 day,	 nothing.	 Every	 quarter	 of	 an
hour	 until	 11	 o’clock	 I	 fly	 along	 the	 corridors,	 search	 every	 hand,
nothing.	Then	it	must	be	at	home;	arrive	home,	and	nothing.	And	this



just	at	a	 time	when	our	boat	 is	 rocking	slightly;	my	fault,	of	course,
you	dearest	girl,	tormented	to	death.
What’s	the	meaning	of	your	not	writing?	Anything	bad?	You,	whom

I	felt	to	be	so	close	to	me,	have	now	gone	your	own	way	in	Berlin	for
a	whole	day,	and	I	know	nothing	about	you.	Which	day	was	it?	The
last	time	you	wrote	was	Tuesday	lunchtime.	Then	in	the	evening	you
couldn’t;	all	right;	Wednesday	during	the	day	you	couldn’t;	all	right;
but	then	you	wrote,	pray	wrote	(I	pray	for	the	past	tense),	wrote	on
Wednesday	 evening;	 and	 tomorrow	 morning,	 first	 mail,	 I	 shall	 get
your	letter	and	read	that	you	don’t	want	to	leave	me,	even	if	you	were
to	find	in	me	not	a	human	being	but	(as	one	might	well	believe	from
some	of	my	letters)	a	sick	ape	gone	berserk.
Sometimes	 I	 think	 of	 the	 false	 impression	 those	 around	 you—the

little	 ones,	 Frl.	 Lindner,	 your	mother	 and	 sister—must	 get	 from	 our
correspondence.	They	must	think	that	over	there	in	Prague	lives	some
honest,	faithful	young	man	who	has	nothing	but	kind	and	good	things
to	say	to	Felice	day	after	day,	things	such	as	the	said	Felice	deserves,
and	 such	 as	would	make	 no	 one	 raise	 an	 eyebrow.	 And	 not	 one	 of
them	knows	that	he	could	very	often	do	Felice	a	good	turn	by	opening
the	window	a	 little,	and	before	her	return	throwing	the	 letter	out	of
that	window.
That	is	just	the	difference	between	us,	Felice.	When	things	go	badly

with	me	(and	I’m	almost	glad	they	haven’t	stopped	doing	so	lately,	for
I	deserve	it),	it	is	my	fault.	It	is	I	who	am	being	flogged,	and	again	it	is
I	 who	 do	 the	 flogging;	 but	 you,	 Felice,	 how	 could	 one	 find	 the
slightest	fault	with	you?
I	have	written	nothing	today;	I	went	to	see	Max,	he	had	asked	me

by	letter,	then	by	word	of	mouth	reproached	me	for	our	drifting	apart;
claims	it’s	my	fault	of	course,	my	way	of	life;	that	I	go	to	see	him	at
best	 once	 a	week,	 and	when	 I	 do,	 I	 look	 as	 though	 I	 had	 just	 been
drummed	out	of	the	deepest	sleep.	What	shall	I	do?	I	hold	on	to	time
by	my	teeth,	and	yet	it	gets	wrenched	out.	On	Saturday	I	have	to	go	to
Max	 again.	 There	 is	 something	 of	 the	 husband	 about	 him;	 he’s
independent	 of	 moods,	 and,	 in	 spite	 of	 suffering	 and	 troubles,
superficially	gay.—Dearest,	tomorrow	you	are	to	appear	to	me	in	that
dreadful	office!

Franz

From	January	24	to	25,	1913



I	have	never	known	you	as	incensed	as	you	are	about	your	Aunt	Klara.
How	 beautiful	 you	 are!	 How	 I	 love	 you!	 Aunt	 Klara	 certainly	 is	 a
strange	female,	and	since	her	mind	works	in	that	way,	it	must	indeed
be	difficult	for	her	to	let	her	daughter	work	in	a	provincial	theater.	I
don’t	know	your	cousin,	because	I	didn’t	go	to	Sophie’s	wedding—not,
as	you	may	think,	because	I	had	no	time	(in	those	days	I	had	no	time
only	at	the	moment	when	something	was	expected	of	me;	otherwise	I
didn’t	know	what	to	do	with	my	surplus	of	misery	and	time),	but	for
the	simple	reason	that	I	was	afraid	of	so	many	strangers.	So	I	stood	at
the	 entrance	 to	 the	 synagogue,	 and	 learned	 later	 that	 the	 girl
accompanying	 Otto	 Brod—about	 whom	 I	 remember	 nothing	 except
that	she	wore	a	showy,	unattractive	hat	with	a	hollow	crown	stuffed
full	 of	 white	 flowers,	 and	 carried	 herself	 proudly—had	 been	 the
actress.	Pity	I	didn’t	go	to	that	wedding!	I	might	have	talked	to	your
brother,	 and	 even	 in	 the	 most	 insignificant	 conversation	 something
would	certainly	have	cropped	up	that	I	would	remember	now	and	that
could	 be	 regarded	 as	 an	 omen	 for	 the	 significance	 that	 you,	 the
unknown	 sister,	 have	 acquired	 for	 me.	 Signs	 appear	 at	 all	 times,
everything	is	filled	with	signs,	but	we	notice	them	only	when	they	are
thrust	upon	us.
You	defend	your	food	admirably	(on	reading	your	letter	for	the	first

time	this	morning	I	felt	like	having	bites	of	your	delicious	sandwiches
and	eating	 them	myself,	and	with	 them	perhaps	even	drinking	some
weak	tea	with	lemon,	with	which	years	ago	I	used	to	enjoy	acidifying
myself),	 but,	 dearest,	 you	will	 not	make	me	 yield.	 Nevertheless,	 on
account	of	my	immense	love,	and	because	these	reforms	seem	to	me
neither	 good,	 nor	 right,	 nor	 profitable,	 I	 may	 gladly	 allow	 you
sausages,	cold	meats,	etc.;	but	I	still	don’t	like	the	amount	of	tea	you
drink,	 least	 of	 all	 the	 regularity	 with	 which	 you	 drink	 it.	 And	 you
defend	it	in	the	way	everyone	defends	the	poison	he	is	accustomed	to:
you	say	your	tea	was	not	so	very	strong,	 just	as	you	might	 tell	your
mother—if,	 when	 handing	 you	 this	 letter,	 she	 were	 to	 call	 our
correspondence	your	undoing—that	you	are	well	able	to	put	up	with
it.	But	 aren’t	 you	wrong	about	 the	 tea?	 (I	 am	not	 talking	about	our
correspondence;	 for	 this	 poison,	 should	 it	 be	 one,	 I	 have	 got	 to
administer;	there’s	nothing	I	can	do	about	it.)	Don’t	drink	tea	quite	so
often.	But	at	once	I	hear	your	mother	exclaim:	“What’s	the	idea?”	and
dare	not	offer	any	further	advice.	Have	a	pleasant	Sunday!	And	a	little
peace	and	quiet!



Franz

Now	 I	 have	 finished	 the	 letter;	 it	 is	 certainly	 late	 enough,	 but
there	are	still	some	things	I	have	to	say:
Above	all	a	reproach	for	not	trusting	me	with	the	commission

for	your	 sister.	 I	 started	 reading	 the	 relevant	part	of	 your	 letter
quite	 proudly,	 and	 grew	 smaller	 and	 smaller	 the	 more	 I	 read,
until	the	following	letter	made	me	realize	I	had	no	chance	at	all,
and	that	the	commission	had	already	been	carried	out.	Oh,	how
could	 you	 make	 me	 feel	 so	 small!	 Don’t	 you	 know	 that	 the
thought	 of	 being	 able	 to	 do	 something	 for	 you	 can	 make	 me
positively	shrewd,	and	that	I	would	have	organized	the	dispatch
promptly	and	perfectly?	The	joy	of	doing	you	a	favor	would	have
exceeded	a	hundred	times	all	the	trouble.
Needless	 to	 say,	 I	would	very	much	 like	 to	 see	 the	picture	of

the	little	one;	after	all,	I	ought	to	know	who	lives	with	me	in	the
locket,	and	what	kind	of	little	person	it	is	who	has	such	claim	on
your	kisses.
The	 mail	 has	 played	 a	 trick	 on	 me	 again.	 Your	 Wednesday

letter,	 the	 one	 you	 wrote	 at	 the	 dentist’s,	 didn’t	 arrive	 at	 the
office	until	Thursday	afternoon;	I	got	it	only	on	Friday	morning—
cursing	and	happy.
Another	 thing	 before	 I	 say	 goodbye:	 Do	 you	 keep	 a	 diary?

Unnecessary	question,	 you	 really	haven’t	 the	 time	now.	But	did
you	ever	keep	one?	For	long?	You	once	mentioned	an	entry	when
telling	me	 of	 your	 great	 love	 at	 the	 age	 of	 15.	 But	 not	 a	word
about	it	since.
But	now	really	goodnight.	An	exchange	of	letters	could	be	very

pleasant,	 if	 only	 at	 the	 end	 of	 a	 letter,	 just	 as	 at	 the	 end	 of	 a
conversation,	one	didn’t	feel	the	natural	desire	to	look	deeply	into
the	other’s	eyes.
Imagine,	 I	 have	 yet	 another	 letter	 to	write	 to	 a	 friend.	 But	 I

intend	to	dash	that	one	off	so	that	no	human	eye	can	read	it.
Very	 latest	 decision:	 I	 am	not	 going	 to	write	 the	 letter	 at	 all,

and	am	off	to	bed.
Franz

You	send	me	so	very	few	newspaper	clippings,	and	I	am	sending



you	 such	 a	 nice	 one	 again.	 Surely	 you	 couldn’t	 have	 lost	 the
clipping	 about	 the	 beatification	 of	 the	 22	 Negro	 youths	 from
Uganda?30

For	January	26,	1913
Got	home	at	1	o’clock	on	Saturday.
I	want	you	to	know,	dearest,	that	I	think	of	you	with	such	love	and

concern,	as	though	God	had	entrusted	you	to	me	in	most	unequivocal
terms.

Franz

Sunday,	January	26,	1913
What	is	it,	dearest?	What	is	driving	you	through	the	streets?	Are	you
really	the	girl	in	today’s	picture,	who	smiles	neither	too	much	nor	too
little,	 and	 to	whom	one	would	 look	 in	 every	 emergency	 in	 order	 to
calm	oneself?	Yet	you	cry?	Come	now,	you	maintain	that	I	am	upset
by	you,	while	in	fact	what	shows	is	no	more	than	my	inadequacy,	the
very	thing	you	have	already	experienced	for	yourself	and	which,	poor
dear,	 I	am	afraid	you	will	have	 to	experience	many	more	 times.	But
tell	me	 quite	 honestly,	 how	has	 your	 life	 changed	 since	we	met?	 In
your	 very	 next	 letter	 please	 tell	me	 precisely	when	 you	 cried	 last—
before	 I	 started	driving	you	 to	 tears	with	my	 letters	 and	apart	 from
isolated	 occasions	 caused	 by,	 say,	 irritation	 with	 irrational	 aunts,
travelers	deserving	to	be	flogged,	etc.	But	what	happened	on	Friday?
What	 was	 it	 all	 about?	 Did	my	 letter	 contain	 hidden	 torments	 that
even	 I	 don’t	 know	 about?	 Was	 it	 the	 bad	 after-effect	 of	 an	 earlier
letter?	Perhaps	I	was	not	the	cause?	But	then,	what	was	it?	Overwork?
You	are	not	the	girl	to	be	thrown	into	confusion	without	some	cogent
and	immediate	reason.	Dearest,	do	tell	me!	Imagine	you	are	talking	to
yourself!
My	 novel!	 The	 night	 before	 last	 I	 declared	 myself	 utterly

vanquished	by	it.	It	is	falling	apart,	I	can	no	longer	contain	it;	though
I	write	nothing	that	could	be	said	 to	be	completely	dissociated	 from
myself,	 it	 has	 recently	 become	 altogether	 too	 disconnected;	 wrong
things	appear	and	cannot	be	made	to	disappear;	 it	will	be	in	greater
danger	if	I	continue	to	work	on	it	than	if	I	drop	it	for	the	time	being.
For	 the	 past	week	 I	 have	 also	 been	 sleeping	 as	 though	 on	watch;	 I
start	 up	 every	 few	moments.	 My	 headaches	 have	 become	 a	 regular



feature,	 and	 minor,	 varying	 nervous	 symptoms	 continue	 to	 trouble
me:	in	short,	I	am	going	to	stop	writing	altogether,	and	meanwhile	for
a	week—possibly	for	much	longer,	 in	 fact—do	nothing	but	rest.	Last
night	 I	 did	 not	 write	 any	more,	 and	 I	 immediately	 slept	 amazingly
well.	If	I	knew	that	you	too	were	resting,	I	would	enjoy	my	rest	even
more.
What	 a	 beautiful,	 delicately	worked	 dress	 you	 are	wearing	 in	 the

picture,	and	what	 is	 the	rest	of	 it	 like?	Are	you	standing,	or	 sitting?
Your	 right	 arm	 is	 missing.	 That	 shiny	 thing,	 is	 it	 the	 locket?—But
what’s	 the	 good	 of	 pictures?	 In	 this	 one	 you	 look	 flourishing,	 your
cheeks	are	round,	your	eyes	clear;	you	are	as	your	mother	and	I	would
like	you	 to	be,	and	 in	 reality	you	 lie	awake	 in	bed	 till	 late	at	night,
and	cry.
I	 have	 heard	 of	 the	 book	Women	 around	 Nap[oleon].31	 I	 am	 not

easily	 convinced	 by	 books	 of	 this	 kind,	 even	 if,	 apart	 from	 the
necessary	 desire,	 I	 had	 the	 time	 to	 read	 them.	 These	 studies	 must
inevitably	feed	on	sensation.	No	doubt	Napoleon	had	less	to	do	with
women	 than	might	be	 imagined	by	an	observer	who	allows	himself,
slowly	but	surely,	to	be	raised	above	all	ordinary	knowledge	of	human
nature	 and	 experience	 of	 the	world	 by	 the	 exclusive	 and	 prolonged
scrutiny	 of	 Napoleon.	 I	 once	 read	 a	 strange	 post-mortem	 report	 on
Napoleon’s	body,	in	which	his	exercise	of	restraint	toward	women	was
mentioned	 in	 a	 convincing	 context	 as	 though	 it	 were	 a	well-known
fact.	In	spite	of	what	seems	like	a	contradiction,	his	lovesick	letters	to
Josephine	 speak	 for	 this	 theory,	 as	 does	 the	 crudeness	 of	 his
utterances	on	sexual	matters.
What	makes	 you	 think	 I	 am	not	 on	 good	 terms	with	Max?	Never

since	we	have	known	each	other,	which	must	be	about	10	years	now,
have	 we	 been	 angry	 with	 each	 other.	 This	 kind	 of	 relationship,	 of
course,	 is	 subject	 to	 its	 ups	 and	 downs,	 like	 all	 things	 human,
especially	where	I	am	involved.	Thus	in	the	course	of	the	years	I	have
had	many	things	to	reproach	myself	for	vis-à-vis	him;	he	on	the	other
hand	may	be	entirely	blameless.	But	I	shall	have	to	write	to	you	about
this	more	 fully	one	day.	Not	 today,	 I	wouldn’t	be	able	 to	describe	 it
properly.

Just	 now,	 at	 4	 in	 the	 afternoon,	 I	 got	 your	 express	 letter.	 Dearest,
dearest,	no	unnecessary	worries!	 I	always	feel	10	times	better	 than	I
say;	it	is	just	my	pen	that	runs	away	with	me,	that’s	all.	What	dreadful
things	 I	may	have	written	 again!	You	 can	 see	what	 a	 great	writer	 I



am:	I	want	to	reassure	my	dearest	girl,	and	all	I	do	is	upset	her.	I	am	a
hopeless	case,	and	I	don’t	even	deserve	a	kiss.

Franz

From	January	26	to	27,	1913
I	have	been	sitting	for	a	long	time	over	Hebbel’s32	letters,	and	now	it’s
late.	He	was	a	man	who	knew	how	to	endure	pain	and	proclaim	the
truth,	just	because	he	felt	secure	in	his	innermost	being.	Not	a	streak
in	his	personality	is	blurred;	he	does	not	tremble,	and	yet	from	the	age
of	30	he	lived	between	2	women,	had	two	families,	deaths	in	both.	He
was	 always	 able	 to	 introduce	 an	 account	 of	 anything	 he	 had	 done
with	the	words:	“If	a	clear	conscience	is	the	test	of	action,	…”	How	far
removed	 am	 I	 from	 men	 like	 these!	 If	 I	 were	 to	 examine	 my
conscience	but	once,	I	should	have	to	spend	my	life	looking	at	the	ups
and	downs	of	 that	 conscience.	 So	 I	 prefer	 to	 turn	my	back	on	 it,	 to
have	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 such	 examinations,	 and	 only	 when	 the
suspicion	of	what	goes	on	behind	my	back	becomes	too	strong	does	it
pull	me	down	a	bit.
As	a	result,	of	course,	I	am	the	guilty	one,	everywhere,	also	in	my

relationship	with	Max.	Out	 of	 love,	weakness,	 cowardice,	 and	many
other	 partly	 unknown	 reasons,	 I	 have	 not	 always	 been	 quite	 honest
with	 him,	 neither	 in	 minor	 matters	 at	 every	 step,	 nor	 always	 in
important	 matters,	 either.—But	 I	 am	 reluctant	 to	 write	 about	 it;	 I
can’t,	dearest,	not	today;	don’t	be	angry	about	it,	and	understand.
But	 you	 need	 have	 no	 worries	 whatever	 about	 our	 mutual

relationship;	 you	 should	 have	 seen	 us	 laughing	 together	 yesterday
evening	when	we	were	alone	in	the	coffeehouse;	his	friendship	for	me
is	 unshakable,	 so	 is	 mine	 for	 him;	 it	 is	 only	 that	 the	 focus	 of	 this
friendship	 rests	 within	 myself	 alone,	 so	 that	 I	 alone	 know	 when	 it
fluctuates,	and	thus	with	the	pain	I	alone	derive	from	it	I	can	atone	for	the
guilt,	which	likewise	is	mine	alone.	Max’s	remark	which	I	told	you	about
and	which	worried	you	was	made	quite	casually,	in	the	usual	way	he
has	of	saying	any	number	of	 things	that	actually	have	nothing	to	do
with	 him,	 without	 thinking	 and	 without	 an	 abiding	 sense	 of
responsibility.	You	don’t	know	him	well	enough,	and	you	don’t	know
my	 overstating,	 uncontrolled	 writing	 well	 enough,	 and	 you	 become
alarmed.	Oh,	it	would	behoove	me	to	dispel	the	alarm	I	have	caused
with	kisses!



Franz

From	January	27	to	28,	1913
You	should	be	here	at	this	moment,	dearest	(an	odd	sort	of	invitation,
it’s	 long	 past	 midnight);	 we	 could	 spend	 a	 lovely	 quiet	 evening,	 so
quiet	 that	 in	 the	 end	 you	 might	 even	 feel	 it	 was	 uncanny.	 Poor
dearest,	do	tell	me	how	it	feels	to	be	so	greatly	loved?	All	I	want	is	to
hold	your	hands	and	 feel	 your	nearness.	A	modest	wish?	And	yet	 it
does	not	cleave	the	night	and	the	distance.
Many	 thanks	 for	 the	 list	 of	 references.	 And	Nebble	 didn’t	 like	 it?
And	 no	 foot	 can	 be	 found	 to	 give	 him	 the	 deserved	 kick?	 I	 haven’t
quite	finished	reading	the	brochure;	a	form	of	hypochondria	(to	which
your	future	customers	are	surely	not	subject)	makes	me	afraid	of	such
small	 print;	 nevertheless,	 I	 have	 already	noticed	 I	was	 too	 late	with
my	suggestion	for	combining	the	Parl[ograph]	with	the	telephone,	an
idea	 on	 which	 I	 had	 been	 preening	 myself	 for	 days.	 So	 it	 already
exists,	and	cannot	be	used	on	a	large	scale?	For	important	discussions
which	 have	 to	 be	 taken	 down	 with	 scrupulous	 accuracy	 in	 banks,
agencies,	 etc.,	 where	 the	 most	 accurate	 records	 or	 the	 presence	 of
witnesses	 are	 required,	 a	 Parl.	 should	 be	 indispensable.	 While	 an
employee	 holds	 one	 receiver,	 the	 other	 would	 be	 connected	 to	 the
Parl.,	and	thus	 irrefutable	evidence	 in	the	speaker’s	own	voice	could
be	 obtained.—The	 clear	 layout	 and	 impressiveness	 of	 the	 list	might
perhaps	 be	 supported	 by	 the	 inclusion	 of	 a	 sheet	 upon	 which	 the
buyers	are	listed	according	to	the	nature	of	their	business,	and	at	the
same	time	a	very	short	outline	of	the	P.’s	capabilities	could	be	given,
according	 to	 the	 buyer’s	 own	 testimony.—But	 on	 the	 whole	 it’s
magnificent	 as	 it	 is,	 and	 I	 am	 so	 proud	 of	 you	 that	 I	 can’t	 possibly
restrain	myself	 from	smothering	you	with	kisses,	 so	much	so	 that	 in
reality	 you	 would	 regret	 ever	 having	 compiled	 the	 list.	 Though	 of
course	this	could	not	be	foreseen,	least	of	all	by	the	management.
I	meant	to	tell	you	yesterday	how	glad	I	am	you	wrote	to	Sophie.	I
will	 pester	 her	 endlessly	with	 requests	 for	 stories	 about	 you,	 but	 of
course	 I	 shall	 do	 so	 with	 the	 delicacy	 and	 cunning	 expected	 of
someone	 with	 my	 great	 adroitness	 and	 conversational	 skill!—And
even	if	it	isn’t	so,	is	it	such	a	bad	thing	that	I	love	you?	Not	too	bold	a
question!

Franz



From	January	28	to	29,	1913
Again	I	come	to	you,	dearest,	from	Hebbel’s	letters.	I	don’t	know	how
ordinary	people,	preoccupied	by	their	mundane	professions	and	their
mundane	concerns,	react	to	these	letters	which	reveal	a	man	who,	out
of	 his	 innermost	 being,	 turbulent	 with	 poetic	 effort	 and	 forever
pouring	 forth,	 even	 in	 moments	 of	 weakness,	 comes	 up	 with	 the
wildest	confessions—but	 I	 for	my	part	can	actually	 feel	him	(though
measured	with	 a	 steady	 eye,	 I	 am	 as	 far	 removed	 from	 him	 as	 the
smallest	moon	is	from	the	sun)	quite	close	to	my	body;	he	laments	at
my	 throat,	 he	 touches	my	weaknesses	 directly	with	 his	 fingers,	 and
sometimes,	rarely	enough,	he	carries	me	along	as	though	the	two	of	us
were	friends.
I	 cannot	 describe	 his	 effect	 on	me	 in	 detail;	 I	 cannot	 deduce	 the
second	from	the	first,	life	becomes	too	difficult	in	such	rarefied	air;	I
break	 away	 from	 the	 actual	 struggle	 to	 repose	 in	 the	 sight	 of	 the
whole.	My	 powers	 of	 reasoning	 are	 incredibly	 limited;	 to	 sense	 the
development	 in	 the	 results,	 that	 I	 can	 do;	 but	 to	 ascend	 from	 the
development	 to	 the	results	or	step	by	step	 to	reconstruct	 it	 from	the
results,	 that	 is	 not	 given	 to	me.	 It	 is	 as	 though	 I	were	 falling	 down
upon	these	things,	and	caught	sight	of	them	only	in	the	confusion	of
my	fall.
Hebbel’s	 thinking	 is	 very	 precise	 and	 contains	 none	 of	 the
subterfuges	 in	which	 one	 tends	 to	 seek	 refuge	when	 in	 despair.	 His
thinking	comes	not	only	from	his	inherent	strength,	dating	back	to	his
earliest	 youth	 (he	 picked	 up	 his	 education	 in	 a	 haphazard	 and
miserable	way);	it	also	follows	a	method	of	his	own,	inherent	from	the
very	beginning	and	bordering	on	the	ingenuous.	When	I	try	to	follow
all	 this	 in	 detail,	 the	 beneficial	 human	 effects	 of	 his	 letters	 cease	 at
once,	and	he	simply	crushes	me.
For	 today’s	 letter,	 dearest,	my	 very	 special	 thanks.	 God	 knows	 in
what	difficult	circumstances	you	wrote	it,	but	even	so,	you	did	write
it;	and	when	leaving	the	office	I	had	in	my	pocket	a	sheet	of	paper	on
which	 you	 had	written	 the	 previous	 day,	 and	which	 could	 be	 held,
caressed,	 and	 loved.	 Imagine,	 I	 even	 ate	 the	 chocolate,	 slowly	 of
course,	 hesitatingly,	 anxiously;	 but	 the	 temptation	 to	 participate	 as
much	as	possible	in	your	life	and	pleasures	was	too	great.	It	didn’t	do
me	any	harm	either,	for	everything	that	comes	from	you	(in	this	you
are	unlike	me)	is	lovely	and	good	and	harmless.

Franz



From	January	29	to	30,	1913
No	doubt	 it	belongs	to	the	order	of	all	 that	 is	new	in	my	experience
since	last	summer	that	now	at	last	I	too	can	catch	colds	as	thoroughly
as	 other	 people.	And	 that	 I	 catch	 cold	without	 knowing	 the	 reason,
and	 in	spite	of	 this	hardened	and	a-thousand-times-massaged	skin	of
mine.	Am	I	perhaps	in	need	of	the	hot	tea	with	which	my	beloved,	in
my	opinion	(though	now,	after	these	colds,	no	longer	relevant),	likes
to	stimulate	herself?	Do	you	know,	there	was	a	time	when	I	thought	I
saw	in	the	impossibility	of	my	catching	a	cold	a	not	insignificant	sign
of	my	increasingly	rapid	downfall;	of	the	fact	of	this	rapid	downfall	I
was	always	convinced.	I	said	to	myself:	(the	not	catching	cold	was	of
course	but	one	sign	among	many)	this	is	how	I	detach	myself	little	by
little	from	human	fellowship;	I	took	care	to	notice	anything	that	might
offer	 some	 proof;	 every	 little	 thing	 went	 wrong;	 not	 all	 fears	 were
confirmed,	 but	 all	 hopes	were	 disappointed;	 if,	when	 discussing	 the
most	trivial	things	with	someone,	he	turned	his	head	only	slightly	to
one	side,	I	at	once	felt	rebuffed,	and	could	see	no	way	of	drawing	the
other’s	 face	 back	 toward	me	 and	 thus	 holding	 on	 to	 it.	 Once	 I	 did
succeed	in	almost	wholly	convincing	Max,	usually	quite	impervious	to
these	states,	that	things	with	me	were	steadily	deteriorating,	and	that
no	 one,	 no	 matter	 how	 much	 he	 loved	 me,	 however	 close	 he	 sat
beside	me,	looking	into	my	eyes	to	reassure	me,	even	putting	his	arms
around	me	 (more	out	of	 desperation	 than	 love),	 could	possibly	 save
me.	 I	 would	 have	 to	 be	 left	 to	 my	 own	 devices,	 which	 I	 actually
preferred,	 and	 for	 the	 rest	 be	 tolerated	 for	 as	 long	 as	 humanly
possible.	 At	 that	 time	we,	 just	 the	 two	 of	 us,	made	 an	 excursion	 to
Dobřichovice,	 a	 pretty	 place	 near	 Prague	 where	 we	 also	 stayed	 the
night.	It	rained	all	of	one	afternoon;	I	 lay	on	the	sofa	in	Max’s	room
(we	had	two	rooms,	 for	 I	have	to	sleep	alone;	you	may	take	this	 for
courage,	 actually	 it	 is	 apprehension:	 just	 as	when	 lying	on	 the	 floor
one	cannot	 fall,	 so,	when	alone,	nothing	can	happen	to	one),	 feeling
quite	apathetic,	yet	I	couldn’t	go	to	sleep,	but	didn’t	want	to	keep	my
eyes	 open	 for	 fear	 of	 disturbing	Max	who	was	 at	 the	 table	 starting
(and	finishing)	his	short	novel	A	Czech	Maidservant33	(which	you	may
have	 read	 later	 in	 the	 Berliner	 Tageblatt);	 there	 I	 lay,	 eyes	 closed,
wearily	listening	to	the	rain	falling	with	a	lot	of	noise	on	the	wooden
roof	and	the	wooden	balcony,	and	consumed	with	impatience	for	Max
finally	 to	 finish	 his	 story	 (which,	 by	 the	 way,	 he	 was	 writing
frantically,	the	pen	simply	flying	across	the	paper)	so	that	I	could	get



up	and	stretch	a	little,	but	actually	for	no	other	purpose	than	to	renew
my	desire	 to	 throw	myself	once	more	onto	 the	 sofa	and	go	on	 lying
there	in	my	apathy.	For	many	years,	and	when	I	try	to	look	back	more
carefully,	 for	 an	 infinite	 number	 of	 days,	 that’s	 how	 I	 lived.	 Your
hand,	dearest,	 so	 that	 there	may	be	a	 like	 infinity	of	beautiful	days!
Your	dear,	beautiful	hand	which,	alas,	I	do	not	dare	to	seize.

Franz

From	January	30	to	31,	1913
Dearest,	 please	 don’t	 torment	 yourself	 by	 writing	 to	 me	 at	 greater
length	than	you	can	manage	comfortably	in	the	time	at	your	disposal;
I	do	want	 to	be	your	comforter,	not	your	 tormentor.	A	greeting	and
the	assurance	that	you	are	there	for	me—I	am	quite	content	with	that
in	 times	 like	 these.	 Are	 you	 not	 being	 rather	 overburdened	 at	 the
office,	now	that	they	have	saddled	you	with	the	work	of	a	third	girl
who	is	ill,	as	well	as	the	billing	clerk	and	Frl.	Grossmann?	Surely	the
management	should	realize	that	this	is	too	much.
How	very	much	better	off	I	am,	or	rather	could	be,	than	you!	If	you

had	as	much	free	time	as	I,	you	would	lead	a	useful,	pleasant	life	that
would	be	a	joy	to	you	and	to	everyone	else.	Indeed,	this	you	manage
even	now,	in	spite	of	being	tied	to	your	office	till	7:45	in	the	evening,
without	 a	 break	 for	 lunch—it’s	 dreadful.	 I	 really	 don’t	 do	 anything;
people	 with	 moods	 that	 interfere	 with	 their	 work	 should	 not	 be
tolerated	 in	 any	 office;	 you	would	 shake	 your	 head	 if,	 for	 example,
you	could	see	what	I	did	at	the	office	today.	I	have	a	great	variety	of
old	 things	 lying	 on	my	 desk—though	 perhaps	 not	 as	much	 as	 some
time	ago,	for	meanwhile	there	has	been	one	week	of	reasonably	useful
work—but	 today	 I	 should	 first	 of	 all	 have	 finished	 a	 report	 for	 the
ministry—actually,	 an	 unimportant	 one—which	 I	 started	 yesterday.
But	I	found	it	impossible;	I	could	think	of	nothing;	in	addition,	a	great
organizing	 job	 had	 to	 be	 done	 at	 the	 office	 today;	 my	 typist	 was
needed	 for	 it,	 so	 there	 I	 sat	 at	 the	 typewriter	myself,	 feeling	 fit	 for
nothing	but	keeping	my	hands	in	my	lap.	At	times	like	these	even	the
typewriter	 loses	 its	 ability	 to	 write,	 and	 if	 one	 simply	 stares	 at	 the
machine,	 it	 begins	 to	 look	 like	 an	 ancient	 invention,	 long	 since
obsolete—a	 mere	 piece	 of	 scrap	 iron.	 I	 wrote	 about	 8	 pages,	 and
tomorrow	 I	 face	 the	 pleasant	 prospect	 of	 having	 to	 tear	 up	 these	 8
pages	as	useless,	and	to	start	the	report—supposed	to	run	to	some	20



pages—all	 over	 again.	Only	 very	 rarely	will	 dictation	 flow	 from	my
lips	 like	 the	 orations	 of	Homeric	 heroes,	 and	 the	 danger	 lies	 in	 the
rarity,	 for	 all	 of	 a	 sudden	 it	 may	 fail	 me	 forevermore.	 Still,	 one
survives,	and	the	juices	continue	to	flow,	however	sluggishly.	But	just
consider	that	apart	 from	my	office	I	do	practically	nothing,	and	that
owing	to	my	neglect	of	the	factory	I	hardly	dare	cast	a	glance	at	my
father,	let	alone	say	a	word	to	him.	Well,	dearest,	praise	me	a	little	for
my	lovely	way	of	life.

Franz

From	[January]	31	to	February	1,	1913
No	 news	 whatever,	 my	 dearest;	 I	 told	 them	 at	 the	 office	 that	 if
something	were	to	come	during	the	afternoon,	they	were	to	send	it	on
to	me,	but	nothing	came.	There	were	two	letters	yesterday,	wish	they
had	 spaced	 themselves	 out!	 But	 I	 am	 not	 worried;	 if	 you	 are	 as
harassed	as	you	have	been	recently,	you	may	safely	 let	a	day	go	by;
you	are	held	close	within	me,	and	so	I	know	about	you.
The	 cold	 is	 still	with	me,	 or	 actually	not	 a	 cold,	 rather	perhaps	 a

largely	 hypochondriacal,	 nevertheless	 slightly	 uncanny	 sensation	 of
shivers	all	down	my	back,	as	though	a	spray	of	cold	water	were	being
constantly	directed	toward	me,	 finding	me	wherever	I	happen	to	be.
Even	now,	while	writing	in	the	warm	room;	it’s	really	devilish.
When	in	this	state,	nothing	can	cheer	one	up	so	much	as	getting	a

letter	full	of	unreasonable	demands	such	as	the	one	I	got	today	from
Stoessl.	 He	 also	 writes	 about	 my	 book	 [Meditation],	 but	 with	 such
complete	lack	of	understanding	that	for	a	moment	I	thought	the	book
must	 really	 be	 good,	 since—even	 in	 a	 man	 as	 discerning	 and
experienced	 in	 literary	matters	 as	 Stoessl—it	 can	 create	 the	 kind	 of
misunderstanding	 one	 would	 consider	 impossible	 with	 books	 and
possible	only	with	living,	hence	complex,	human	beings.	There	is	only
one	 explanation:	 either	 that	 he	 read	 the	 book	 superficially,	 or	 only
parts	 of	 it,	 or	 (though	 the	 impression	 of	 good	 faith	 his	 personality
creates	with	every	word	makes	it	unlikely)	that	he	didn’t	read	it	at	all.
I	am	copying	the	relevant	passage	for	you,	because	his	writing	is	quite
illegible,	 and	 even	 if	 after	 much	 effort	 you	 thought	 you	 could
decipher	 it,	 you	 would	 undoubtedly	 be	 reading	 it	 with	 misleading
interpretations.	He	writes:	“I	read	your	outwardly	as	well	as	inwardly
beautifully	executed	book	at	once	and	at	a	sitting,	and	derived	much



pleasure	 from	 the	 strangely	 elusive,	 delicately	 controlled,
lighthearted,	yet	profound	gaiety	of	the	small	memorials	to	minor	and
major	 moments	 in	 life.	 It	 is	 full	 of	 very	 pertinent	 humor,	 turned
inward	as	 it	were,	not	unlike	 the	way	 in	which,	after	a	good	night’s
sleep,	a	 refreshing	bath,	and	dressed	 in	clean	 linen,	one	welcomes	a
free,	 sunny	 day	 with	 happy	 expectations	 and	 an	 inconceivable
sensation	of	strength.	The	humor	of	a	healthy	frame	of	mind.	One	can
think	 of	 no	 happier	 condition	 for	 an	 author	 himself,	 no	 safer
guarantee,	than	the	limpid	atmosphere	of	his	first	work.”	By	the	way,
there	 is	 one	 other	 explanation	 for	 this	 opinion	 which	 I	 forgot	 just
now:	he	doesn’t	like	the	book;	this,	considering	the	special	structure	of
his	 character,	 would	 not	 be	 inconceivable.	 The	 letter,	 incidentally,
goes	 rather	 well	 with	 an	 extravagantly	 favorable	 review	 published
today,	which	finds	in	the	book	nothing	but	sorrow.34
Sophie	 [Friedmann]	 arrived	 this	 evening;	 had	 it	 not	 been	 for	my
back,	 chilled	 to	 the	 bone,	 and	 the	 “humor	 of	 a	 healthy	 frame	 of
mind,”	I	would	have	liked	to	meet	her	at	the	station.	Having	had	no
news	of	you,	I	should	at	least	have	glimpsed	a	pair	of	eyes	that	have
seen	 you	 for	 weeks	 on	 end;	 no	 doubt	 your	 name	 would	 have	 been
mentioned,	and	even	if	it	had	all	been	confined	to	one	short	tram	ride,
it	would	still	have	been	nice.	But	next	week	 I	 shall	besiege	her,	and
even	if,	despite	your	promises,	I	should	have	heard	nothing	from	you
about	your	stay	in	Breslau,	I	am	determined	to	make	her	talk.	Dearest,
what	 a	 substitute	 for	 your	 presence!	 In	 your	 absence	 I	 embrace
rumors,	talk,	allusions,	recollections—and	there	the	matter	rests.
To	 prevent	 you	 from	being	 alone	 in	 your	 court	 cases,	 I	 am	off	 to
attend	court	at	Leitmeritz	again	on	Monday.	Very	tiresome!	This	time,
however,	it	won’t	interrupt	a	story.	But	I	should	have	preferred,	with
a	brief	detour	via	Berlin,	to	have	gone	to	the	warm	South,	where	Max
and	 his	 wife	 are	 going	 on	 Sunday	 afternoon.	 But	 how	 can	 this	 be
done?

Franz

Mother,	a	kind	word	today!35
From	February	1	to	2,	1913

I	am	just	sitting	down	at	my	desk	for	the	first	time	since	my	afternoon
letter.36	What’s	the	time?	(I	am	writing	the	answer	on	the	next	page,
like	 those	 horrible	 surprises	 in	 a	 serial	 novel.)‡	 I	 spent	 the	 whole



afternoon	 with	 Werfel,	 the	 evening	 with	 Max	 and—tormented	 by
fatigue	and	pressure	in	the	head,	today	near	the	crown	of	my	skull—
didn’t	get	 to	bed	until	after	eight.	Needless	 to	 say,	 the	usual	chatter
from	next	door	had	started,	and,	from	time	to	time,	just	as	fatigue	had
plunged	 me	 into	 sleep,	 it	 would	 whip	 me	 violently	 awake	 again.
Nevertheless	 I	 stayed	 in	bed	until	now	in	a	perfect	mixture	of	 sleep,
drowsiness,	dreaminess,	and	definite	wakefulness,	getting	up	only	 to
write	to	you,	dearest,	and	to	make	notes	of	a	few	things	for	my	novel
that	 attacked	 me	 in	 bed	 with	 a	 mighty	 burst,	 though	 my	 dread	 of
these	isolated	illuminations	of	future	events	is	greater	than	my	desire
for	them.	I	found	my	supper	on	my	table,	for	once	correctly	prepared
(being	 so	 complicated,	 this	 is	 by	 no	means	 easy),	 but	 I	 put	 it	 away
uneaten.	For	a	few	days	my	stomach,	like	the	rest	of	me,	has	been	out
of	order,	and	I	am	trying	to	cure	it	by	starving.	Today	for	 instance	I
ate	only	at	 lunchtime.	 I	mention	 this	 so	as	 to	hold	before	your	eyes
every	detail	from	which	I	expect	success.
Werfel	read	to	me	some	new	poems;	again	they	undoubtedly	spring

from	 a	 tremendous	 personality.	 Astonishing	 how	 this	 kind	 of	 poem,
carrying	 its	 inherent	 end	 in	 its	 beginning,	 rises	 with	 a	 continuous,
inner,	 flowing	 development—how	 one	 opens	 one’s	 eyes	 while	 lying
doubled	up	on	the	sofa.	And	the	young	man	has	grown	handsome	and
reads	with	 such	 ferocity	 (to	 the	monotony	 of	which	 I	 actually	 have
some	objections)!	He	knows	by	heart	everything	he	has	ever	written,
and	his	passion	seems	 to	set	 fire	 to	 the	heavy	body,	 the	great	chest,
the	 round	 cheeks;	 and	 when	 reading	 aloud	 he	 looks	 as	 if	 he	 were
about	 to	 tear	 himself	 to	 pieces.	 He	 will	 be	 reading	 in	 Berlin	 in
February;	whatever	 happens,	 you	must	 go.	And	 of	 course	 there	was
some	talk	about	you	(if	not	by	name);	how	could	I	spend	an	afternoon
without	you?	And	he	wrote	a	short	dedication	for	me	in	his	Friend	of
the	World37	to	“A	Person	Unknown,”	to	annoy	Frl.	Lindner.	I	will	send
you	 the	 book	 before	 long—if	 only	 the	 job	 of	 packing,	mailing,	 etc.,
weren’t	always	such	a	problem.	This	is	also	why	Intensity	of	Feeling	has
been	 lying	 around	 here	 for	 so	 long;	 of	 course	 the	 book	 is	 yours,	 I
promised	 it	 to	 you	 ages	 ago.	 Similarly	 Flaubert,	 in	 French	 and
destined	 for	 you,	 has	 been	 lying	 about	 my	 desk	 for	 weeks,	 and	 I
abandon	myself	 to	 reveries	 about	 the	 possible	ways	 of	 packing	 and
mailing.
Could	 you	 actually	 read	 the	 letter	 from	 Löwy	 that	 I	 sent	 you	 for

Sunday?	He	played	in	Berlin	on	Sunday,	at	least	this	is	what	I	thought
I	 had	 gathered	 from	 his	 letter,	 and	 so	 I	 perpetrated	 the	 ruse	 of



underlining	 that	 passage.	 I	 reproached	myself	 for	 it	 afterwards,	 and
am	now	glad	that	you	either	didn’t	notice	the	underlined	passage,	or
didn’t	 go	 to	 the	 theater	 for	 some	 other	 reason.	 I	 make	 sufficient
demands	on	the	little	free	time	you	have,	more	than	sufficient!	Werfel,
who	 also	 met	 Löwy,	 told	 me	 that	 the	 Leipzig	 correspondent	 of	 the
Berliner	 Tageblatt,	 a	 certain	 Dr.	 Pinthus,38	 whom	 by	 the	 way	 I	 also
know	(he	is	a	clumsy	creature	and	little	can	be	expected	of	him),	liked
the	company	so	much	that	he	is	going	to	write	an	article	about	them
in	the	B.T.	Please	send	it	 to	me	if	you	come	across	 it;	 I	still	 think	of
the	actors	with	pleasure.
Your	suggestions,	dearest,	for	a	new	timetable—I	can’t	follow	them.

The	present	way	is	the	only	possible	one;	if	I	can’t	bear	it,	so	much	the
worse;	but	I	will	bear	it	somehow.	One	to	two	hours	for	writing	is	not
enough	(apart	from	the	fact	that	you	have	not	allocated	any	time	for
writing	 to	 you);	 ten	 hours	 would	 be	 perfect,	 but	 since	 perfection
cannot	be	achieved	one	must	at	least	come	as	close	to	it	as	possible,
and	 not	 give	 a	 thought	 to	 sparing	 oneself.	 Anyway,	 I	 have	 made
terribly	bad	use	of	the	last	few	days	for	my	writing;	things	will	have
to	change;	 it	 is	undermining	me;	again	 today	I	have	written	nothing
whatever,	and	when	going	to	bed	this	evening	I	was	 in	such	despair
about	my	 tiredness	 and	 the	 short	 time	 at	my	disposal	 that	 I	 prayed
half-asleep	 for	 the	 whole	 world	 to	 be	 placed	 in	 my	 hands,	 so	 that
bereft	 of	 my	 senses	 I	 could	 shake	 it	 in	 a	 blind	 rage.	 Oh	 God!	 Oh
dearest!

Franz

February	2,	1913
Dearest,	 do	 you	 know	 where	 your	 hardy,	 chill-proof,	 cast-iron
madman	 is	writing	 to	 you	 at	 this	moment?	By	no	means	 out	 in	 the
clear	winter	night,	but	shame	upon	shame,	in	the	warm	kitchen.	Only
the	 living	room	is	heated;	 in	 this	gale	and	at	 this	height	 it	 is	almost
impossible	to	heat	anything	else;	my	room	is	unheated	because	I	mean
to	 go	 to	 Leitmeritz	 this	 afternoon	 (although	 I	 may	 not	 go	 until
tomorrow);	the	family	are	asleep	in	the	living	room,	one	on	top	of	the
other;	but	the	kitchen	is	empty	and	quiet,	and	if	it	weren’t	for	the	cold
tiles	and	the	loud	ticking	of	the	clock,	it	would	be	the	perfect	writing
room.
Max’s	wedding	is	over,	and	he	is	already	on	his	way	to	the	South,



but	there	were	no	special	wedding	celebrations,	as	you	seem	to	think
there	would	be;	just	the	marriage	ceremony	at	the	hotel,	nothing	else,
no	wedding-eve	party,	no	banquet,	so	my	fear	of	people	was	not	put
to	the	test.	But	I	did	derive	some	special	pleasure	from	the	wedding,
for	 Sophie,	 with	 whom	 I	 exchanged	 a	 few	 words,	 told	 me	 she	 had
something	to	tell	me,	and	since	I	have	a	lot	to	listen	to,	this	suits	me
very	well.	Though	I	can’t	go	to	the	Brods’	either	today	or	tomorrow,
on	 Tuesday	 I	 will	 dash	 there.	 I	 don’t	 really	 want	 to	 hear	 anything
special,	 I	 just	want	 to	 be	 near	 Sophie,	 because	 you	 have	 been	 near
her.
Dearest,	I	can’t	help	it,	I	have	to	stop,	though	I	feel	as	though	I	were
being	 torn	 from	you	bodily.	On	Tuesday	you	will	only	get	postcards
from	me.	Dearest,	may	you	be	preserved	from	bad	dreams,	no	matter
how	much	meaning	and	warning	they	may	contain.

Franz

[PICTURE	POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Leitmeritz,	February	3,	1913]

Best	wishes.	Just	managed	to	get	ready	in	time	to	leave.	My	sister	and
traveling	companion	sends	greetings	below	in	her	own	hand.

FK.
Ottla	Kafka

[On	the	return	journey	from	Leitmeritz	to	Prague,	February	3,	1913]
It’s	 dark	 in	 the	 train;	 one	 can	 no	 longer	 write;	 also	 I	 am	 tired,
everybody	 around	me	 is	 asleep,	my	 sister	 is	 in	 the	 corridor	 looking
out	of	the	window,	and	at	this	very	moment	is	turning	toward	me.	It
is	raining	like	mad.	I	am	glad	to	be	on	my	way	back	to	your	letter,	to
sleep,	to	the	possibility	of	writing.
Farewell,	dearest,	farewell.

Franz

From	February	3	to	4,	1913
Take	me,	dearest,	 just	as	 I	am.	Worn	out	by	 the	 journey,	even	more
worn	 out	 by	myself,	 I	 nevertheless	went	 to	 the	 Brods’	 this	 evening.



And	what	 did	 I	 accomplish	 there?	 For	myself,	 a	 good	deal.	 For	 two
hours	I	sat	next	to	Sophie,	next	to	whom	you	too	had	been	sitting,	sat
in	 the	 same	 place	 as	 that	 day	 in	 August,	 and	 your	 name	 was
mentioned	twice.	But	 I	cannot	claim	much	credit	 for	 the	mentioning
of	your	name,	and	if	your	name	was	not	mentioned	more	often,	it	was
probably	I	who	prevented	it.	Your	name	was	first	mentioned	suddenly
in	 the	 middle	 of	 some	 other	 conversation.	 You	 sent	 your	 regards,
Sophie	said,	to	everyone,	“from	Frau	Brod	all	the	way	to	Dr.	Kafka.”
The	 sequence	of	your	greetings	would	have	 suited	me,	 for	after	you
had	disposed	 of	 them	all,	 I	would	 have	 had	 you	 for	myself	 alone,	 I
would	have	held	you	and	not	have	had	to	let	you	go.	Moreover,	the
fact	 that	you	were	mentioned	among	strangers,	and	that	 I	 felt	closer
to	 you	 than	 any	 of	 them,	 hence	 superior	 to	 all	 of	 them,	 gave	me	 a
feeling	 of	 warmth,	 and	 I	 was	 very	 contented.	 But	 this	 one	mention
was	 the	 limit	 of	 what	 I	 could	 have	 borne	 without	 becoming
conspicuous,	without	making	faces,	without	becoming	unhappy	at	the
thought	that	everyone	after	all	had	been	able	to	share	in	you.	And	so	I
tried	to	banish	you	from	my	mind,	and	only	when	they	had	stopped
talking	of	you	did	you	become	audible	to	me	again.
Dearest,	how	tired	you	must	be!	No	doubt	Berlin	has	to	be	like	that,
and	probably	everyone	leads	that	kind	of	life,	but	how	can	you	stand
your	work	at	 the	office	on	 so	 little	 sleep?	 I	 am	sure	 it	 is	 impossible
without	undue	strain	and	damage	to	your	health.	You	know,	one	does
worry	about	these	things	from	afar.	You	mustn’t	imagine	that	I	see	the
necessity	for	all	this.	I	realize	that	everything	in	Berlin	is	bound	to	be
noisier	 and	 gayer	 than	 here	 (yet	 even	 our	 noise	 and	 our	 gaiety	 are
more	than	I	can	cope	with).	 In	similar	circumstances,	above	all	with
Max’s	circle	of	friends,	a	wedding	as	he	conducted	his,	not	without	my
influence	 (I	 am	 a	 great	 authority	 on	 carelessness	 and	 informality),
would	probably	be	impossible	in	Berlin.	What	a	state	you	must	have
been	 in	 on	 Monday!	 But	 who	 am	 I	 to	 judge,	 I	 who	 am	 generally
incapable	even	of	passing	the	time	of	day	with	anyone?	I	cannot	keep
a	conversation	going.	Even	the	sight	of	a	familiar	face	soon	leads	me
astray.

Franz

From	February	4	to	5,	1913
That	you	won	so	many	things,	my	lucky	dearest,	is	of	course	nice,	and



I	am	pleased,	but	a	fountain	pen	was	not	necessary	for	your	letters	to
me;	 I	 like	 them	 no	matter	 how	 they	 are	written.	 Fancy	 those	 raffle
tickets	pouring	down	on	you,	and	you	being	dragged	to	and	fro!	And	I
not	there,	in	a	corner,	to	hold	you	and	keep	you	away	from	everyone
else!
The	 postcard	with	 your	mother’s	 signature	 arrived	 this	 afternoon.
What	is	your	mother’s	first	name?	Anna?	It	all	looks	very	formal,	you
know—“Greetings”	and	“Frau.”	Still,	for	me	it	is	a	very	special	gift.—
Why	 is	 Frau	 Bluen	 so	 affected?	And	what	 sort	 of	 a	 party	was	 it?	 It
took	place	at	that	great	table?	Where	did	you	sit,	and	your	mother?
A	 certain	 Otto	 Pick39	 writes	 to	 me	 today	 (does	 his	 name	 mean
anything	 to	 you?	 He	 has	 published	 quite	 a	 good	 book	 of	 poetry
entitled	A	 Friendly	 Experience.	 You	 may	 have	 read	 an	 article	 of	 his
about	 Werfel	 in	 Der	 Zeitgeist40).	 Anyway,	 he	 writes:	 “I	 have	 a
prospective	customer	for	a	Parlograph,	and	would	be	glad	if	you	could
let	me	have	further	information	(if	possible	with	price	list).”	I	met	him
by	chance	on	the	very	day	I	received	your	list	of	references;	made	an
appointment	on	 the	 spot	 (since	 in	my	opinion	he	has	great	business
ability,	as	well	as	contacts	with	newspapers	and	banks	where,	as	I	see
it,	although	newspapers	and	banks	may	not	be	mentioned	in	the	list,	it
should	be	easy	to	introduce	the	Parlograph),	took	the	list	to	him	that
evening,	and	 set	him	 to	work	at	once.	And	now	 this	 is	his	 reaction.
But	how	can	the	machine	be	demonstrated?	Who	knows,	I	may	even
be	able	to	find	an	agent.	Give	me	a	little	time.	After	all,	who	in	Prague
has	a	Parlograph?	Löwy	and	Winterberg	are	certainly	a	large	concern
—as	 far	 as	 I	 know	 the	 third	 largest	 timber	merchant	 in	 Bohemia;	 I
have	had	dealings	with	them	in	the	past.	Just	 force	a	Parlograph	on
them,	 you	 dearest	 businesswoman.	 I	 cannot	 recommend	 the
Parlograph	itself,	but	if	it	is	a	question	of	a	reference	stating	that	you
are	 the	 best	 and	 sweetest	 girl,	 that	 hence	 even	 an	 impractical
machine,	provided	it	was	you	who	sold	it,	has	its	virtues,	just	because
it	was	you	who	sold	it—then	all	they	have	to	do	is	come	to	me.

Franz

From	February	5	to	6,	1913
Dearest,	 it	 really	 is	 an	 unbelievably	 pleasant	 surprise	 to	 find	 yet
another	letter	from	you	waiting	at	home.	If	only	it	weren’t	marred	by
the	thought	that	with	this	letter	I	hold	in	my	hands	the	misspent	hour



that	 should	 have	 been	 devoted	 to	 your	 walk,	 furthermore	 if	 it	 is
permissible	to	write	twice,	then	there	is	no	reason	why	we	shouldn’t
write	 to	 each	 other	 all	 the	 time,	 and	 for	 heaven’s	 sake	move	 closer
together	until	we	 are	 completely	 together,	 each	 in	 the	 other’s	 arms.
But	 this	 is	not	 likely	 to	happen,	 and	 so	only	gets	one	down.	Finally
one	is	left	with	the	dread	that	there	might	not	be	a	letter	the	next	day,
at	 least	not	 first	 thing.	And	 it’s	 that	 letter,	 the	one	 laid	on	 the	 table
first	 thing	 in	 the	morning,	without	 the	 torment	of	waiting,	which	 is
such	a	comfort.
While	you	were	writing	 to	me	on	Monday	 I	was	no	 longer	on	 the
train,	but	at	the	Brods’;	your	name	may	have	been	mentioned	at	that
very	moment,	whereupon	I	lapsed	into	silence	and	thoughts	of	you.
The	journey	went	off	fairly	well.	At	first,	the	thought	of	getting	up
at	4:30	A.M.,	as	 I	did	 last	 time,	 sitting	 in	 the	 train,	 then	 in	 the	damp
and	 cold	 and	 misery	 of	 the	 coach,	 seeing	 my	 relatives,	 attending
court,	and	finally	the	same	silent	train	journey	home—all	this	was	so
odious	 to	me	that	 I	had	decided	 to	go	 in	 the	evening	and	spend	 the
night	in	Leitmeritz,	at	the	same	time	bearing	in	mind	my	cold,	which
has	 now	 completely	 gone.	 What’s	 more,	 sleeping	 in	 a	 hotel	 room,
sitting	in	an	unfamiliar,	overcrowded	restaurant	on	a	Sunday	evening
—this	 is	 quite	 good	 for	me,	 it’s	where	 I	 like	 to	 be	 silent.	 But	 then,
unexpectedly	 and	 by	 force,	 the	Weltsch41	 family	 dragged	me	 to	 the
theater	 that	evening	to	see	Miss	 Josette—My	Wife	 in	which	a	mutual
friend	was	appearing	 for	 the	 first	 time—needless	 to	say,	 in	 the	most
minor	of	parts:	 all	 she	had	 to	do	was	 to	give	a	 sudden	 laugh	 in	 the
first	 scene,	 show	 her	 delight,	 and	 throw	 up	 her	 arms,	 which	 she
accomplished	 in	 a	 somewhat	 exaggerated	manner,	most	 of	 the	 time
with	 her	 back	 to	 the	 audience	 and	 almost	 in	 the	 wings,	 whereas
offstage	 she	 is	 an	 arrogant,	 malicious,	 shrewd,	 and	 very	 intelligent
female	who	 always	 frightens	me.	 It	was	 rather	 inconsiderate	 to	 put
her	on	the	stage	for	the	first	time	in	that	kind	of	part.
At	 the	 end	 of	 the	 second	 act—of	 course	 even	 the	 worst	 play	 has
moments	when	one	becomes	personally	 involved,	 and	perhaps	 some
other	evening	I	might	have	sat	it	out—nothing	could	persuade	me	to
stay	and	I	rushed	home	without	saying	goodbye,	thus	missing	one	or
two	 acts	 of	 Josette	 and	 a	 farce	 entitled	 In	Mufti,	 but	 instead	 getting
sooner	into	the	fresh	air	and	earlier	to	bed.	At	home	with	my	sister	I
again	began	cursing	this	journey,	and	since	she	was	very	keen	to	come
with	me	(not	only	to	prove	to	me	that	the	journey	isn’t	so	terrible),	I



gladly	 promised	 to	 take	 her.	 Although	 this	 decision	 was	 not	 taken
until	 10:30	 at	 night,	 my	 father,	 surprisingly	 enough,	 raised	 no
objections,	 which	 can	 only	 be	 explained	 by	 the	 fact	 that	 we	 have
relatives	 in	 Leitmeritz,	 and	 my	 father	 is	 always	 very	 anxious	 to
maintain	 family	 connections,	 and	 for	 this	 purpose	 my	 sister	 strikes
him	 as	 a	 more	 suitable	 choice	 than	 I.	 So	 we	 left	 together	 in	 the
morning;	 the	weather	was	 still	 fine,	but	by	 the	 time	we	were	 in	 the
coach	it	was	raining	into	our	faces,	and	from	then	on	it	never	stopped.
I	was	in	court	continuously	until	2	o’clock	(no	decision	was	reached,
the	 case	 had	 to	 be	 adjourned	 once	 more,	 but	 I’d	 rather	 be	 flogged
than	come	out	here	again),	my	sister	continuously	with	our	relatives.
She	is	a	little	inhibited	about	writing	(fundamentally	not	unlike	me),
which	 is	why	 she	only	 signed	her	name.	But	 she	 is	not	 lazy,	 as	you
seem	to	think;	my	other	two	sisters	were	the	lazy	ones,	or	rather	only
the	eldest.	She	was	always	to	be	found	on	the	nearest	sofa.	Actually,
Ottla	works	 in	our	shop;	she	 is	 there	when	it	opens	at	7:15	A.M.	 (my
father	doesn’t	turn	up	till	8:30),	and	stays	for	lunch	which	is	brought
to	her	there;	she	doesn’t	get	home	until	four	or	five	in	the	afternoon,
and	during	the	season	may	even	stay	on	till	closing	time.
Her	work,	however,	 is	not	all	 that	hard,	and	on	 the	whole	 I	don’t

know	 any	 girl	 who	 exerts	 herself	 the	 way	 you	 do,	 nor	 one	 whose
exertions	 I	 should	 like	 to	 relieve	 more	 than,	 yours.	 But	 what	 am	 I
capable	 of,	 anyhow?	 Kissing,	 yes,	 kissing	 from	 afar!	 Please	 tell	 me,
dearest,	in	your	very	next	letter,	how	you	would	answer	Frl.	Lindner
if,	instead	of	general	questions,	she	were	to	ask	point-blank:	“Has	this
man	 actually	 been	 to	 Berlin	 once	 in	 the	 course	 of	 the	 past	 three
months?	 He	 hasn’t?	 And	 why	 not?	 He	 leaves	 Prague	 at	 noon	 on
Saturday	or,	if	that’s	not	possible,	then	in	the	evening,	spends	Sunday
in	Berlin,	and	returns	to	Prague	that	night.	It	is	a	bit	strenuous,	but	on
the	whole	quite	 feasible.	Why	doesn’t	he	do	 it?”	Poor	dearest,	what
would	you	say?

Franz

From	February	6	to	7,	1913
Dearest,	 it’s	 late	and	I	am	weary.	 I	spent	the	afternoon	at	 the	office,
hadn’t	 slept,	 did	 some	 boring	 work,	 accident	 statistics	 (so	 that	 you
shall	know	the	name	of	this,	too,	and	to	my	delight	have	your	breath
permeate	 every	 trifle	 that	 belongs	 to	 me),	 and	 the	 following	 hours



were	 badly	 spent	 as	 well.	 (Ah,	 my	 cheeks	 are	 burning	 with
exhaustion.)	I	walked	out	of	the	office	with	comparative	gusto,	passed
Weltsch’s	 house,	 saw	 a	 light	 in	 his	 room,	 assumed	he	was	working,
and	 thought	 this	might	 be	 a	 suitable	 opportunity	 to	 go	 and	 disturb
him,	for	I	had	not	spoken	to	him	for	a	long	time.	(No,	you	don’t	even
know	what	he	is.	He	is	a	Doctor	of	Law	and	a	Doctor	of	Philosophy,
an	official	at	the	university	library,	where	he	has	nothing	to	do,	and
together	 with	Max	 he	 is	 bringing	 out	 a	 philosophical	 work	 entitled
Intuition	 and	 Concept,42	 which	 may	 appear	 before	 the	 end	 of	 the
month.)	Well,	 I	went	 upstairs,	 found	him	 as	 usual	 in	 an	 overheated
room	 full	 of	 foul	 air,	 for	 his	 hypochondria	 lodges	 in	 his	 lungs	 and
larynx;	he	seemed	delighted	to	have	been	interrupted	in	his	reading	of
an	immensely	complex	book	by	Cohen—The	Logic	of	Pure	Perception,43
if	I	am	not	mistaken—but	I	soon	realized	I	wasn’t	going	to	be	able	to
drag	him	out	of	that	almost	unbreathable	air	to	come	for	a	walk.	Had
we	discussed	general	topics	only,	I	should	have	succeeded	fairly	soon,
but	 he	 derives	 great	 and,	 to	me,	 incomprehensible	 satisfaction	 from
reading	 to	me	 intimate	 letters,	 both	 old	 and	 recent,	 at	 the	 slightest
opportunity.	And	 this	opportunity	presenting	 itself	 today,	he	opened
his	secret	drawer	where	everything	is	kept	tied	in	bundles	 in	perfect
order.	Here	lies	everything	concerning	the	most	personal	matters	that
can	be	preserved	in	writing,	letters	he	has	received,	shorthand	drafts
of	 all	 letters	 he	 has	 written,	 exact	 data	 of	 every	 development,
conversations	 in	 shorthand,	 shorthand	 reflections	on	all	 these	 things
from	the	remote	and	remotest	past.	No	doubt	hardly	a	soul	but	Max
and	 I	 knows	 anything	 about	 all	 this,	 for	 you	must	 not	 imagine	 that
W[eltsch]	 is	 loquacious,	 quite	 the	 contrary.	 But	 today	he	wanted	 to
talk,	and	the	more	 incomprehensible	 the	satisfaction	and	comfort	he
derives	from	it	become	to	me,	the	greater	grows	my	patience	to	suffer
these	readings	and	confidences.	And	when,	in	order	to	make	me	stay,
he	 even	brought	 himself,	 for	my	 sake,	 to	 open	 the	door	 to	 the	 cold
adjacent	room,	I	was	powerless	to	resist,	lay	down	on	the	sofa	in	my
overcoat,	and	listened.	I	love	him,	but	not	at	such	times.—No	more!	A
weary	kiss—interminable,	but	not	just	from	weariness.

Franz

From	February	9	to	10,	1913
[Presumably	during	the	night	of	February	7	to	8,	1913]



I	am	sitting	down	to	write	 in	a	state	of	some	confusion;	I	have	been
reading	 a	 lot	 of	 different	 things	 that	 are	merging	 into	 one	 another,
and	if	one	hopes	to	find	a	solution	for	oneself	by	this	kind	of	reading,
one	 is	mistaken;	 one	 comes	 up	 against	 a	wall,	 and	 cannot	 proceed.
Your	life	is	so	very	different,	dearest.	Except	in	relation	to	your	fellow
men,	have	you	ever	known	uncertainty?	Have	you	ever	observed	how,
within	yourself	and	independent	of	other	people,	diverse	possibilities
open	up	in	several	directions,	thereby	actually	creating	a	ban	on	your
every	movement?	Have	you	ever,	without	giving	the	slightest	thought
to	 anyone	 else,	 been	 in	 despair	 simply	 about	 yourself?	 Desperate
enough	to	throw	yourself	on	the	ground	and	remain	there	beyond	the
Day	of	Judgment?	How	devout	are	you?	You	go	to	the	synagogue;	but
I	 dare	 say	 you	 have	 not	 been	 recently.	 And	what	 is	 it	 that	 sustains
you,	 the	 idea	of	 Judaism	or	of	God?	Are	you	aware,	 and	 this	 is	 the
most	 important	 thing,	 of	 a	 continuous	 relationship	between	yourself
and	a	reassuringly	distant,	if	possibly	infinite	height	or	depth?	He	who
feels	 this	 continuously	 has	 no	 need	 to	 roam	 about	 like	 a	 lost	 dog,
mutely	 gazing	 around	with	 imploring	 eyes;	 he	 never	 need	 yearn	 to
slip	 into	 a	 grave	 as	 if	 it	 were	 a	 warm	 sleeping	 bag	 and	 life	 a	 cold
winter	night;	and	when	climbing	the	stairs	to	his	office	he	never	need
imagine	that	he	is	careering	down	the	well	of	the	staircase,	flickering
in	the	uncertain	light,	twisting	from	the	speed	of	his	fall,	shaking	his
head	with	impatience.
There	are	 times,	dearest,	when	 I	am	convinced	 I	am	unfit	 for	any
human	 relationship.	 I	 am	 certainly	 devoted	 to	my	 sister,	 and	 at	 the
moment	of	my	invitation	I	was	genuinely	pleased	that	she	wanted	to
come	with	me	to	Leitmeritz;	I	was	glad	to	give	her	the	pleasure	of	this
trip,	 and	 to	 be	 able	 to	 look	 after	 her	 properly,	 for	 to	 look	 after
someone	 is	 my	 secret,	 everlasting	 desire,	 neither	 recognized	 nor
credited,	 perhaps,	 by	 anyone	 around	 me—but	 when,	 after	 3	 or	 4
hours	of	traveling	together,	sharing	a	coach,	sharing	breakfast,	when	I
said	 goodbye	 to	 her	 at	 Leitmeritz	 to	 go	 to	 court,	 I	was	 delighted,	 I
heaved	a	sigh	of	relief;	being	alone	again	I	felt	an	ease	such	as	I	never
could	feel	in	the	presence	of	my	sister.	Why,	dearest,	why?	Have	you
ever	experienced	anything	 remotely	 similar	with	 someone	you	 love?
The	 circumstances	were	 by	 no	means	 exceptional,	 for	we	 parted	 on
the	friendliest	terms,	and	six	hours	later	met	again	on	the	friendliest
terms.	 Nor	 was	 it	 a	 unique	 occurrence;	 tomorrow,	 the	 day	 after,
whenever	it	may	be,	the	same	thing	will	be	repeated.—Dearest,	to	lie
at	your	feet	and	be	calm,	that	would	be	best.



Franz

February	9,	1913
Sunday	afternoon,	6	o’clock,	on	the	train
Why,	 oh	 why	 didn’t	 I	 write	 last	 night!	 Here	 in	 the	 compartment
among	a	lot	of	people,	it	will	come	to	nothing.	And	all	day	long	I	was
disturbed,	dissatisfied,	as	though	I	had	damaged	my	contact	with	you,
which	after	all	I	need	in	order	to	live.	Why,	oh	why	did	I	allow	myself
to	be	 led	astray	 to	go	 for	 this	walk,	when	I	knew	I	would	only	drag
myself	along	like	a	shadow.	But	the	weather	was	so	lovely,	and	being
rather	 desperate	 I	 thought:	 run	 along	 with	 them,	 maybe	 you’ll	 feel
better.	After	all,	one	of	them	has	a	fountain	pen	(the	one	I	am	writing
with	 now),	 and	 so	 I	 thought	 I	 would	 somehow	 find	 an	 opportunity
and	a	quiet	moment	to	write	to	you.	But	no,	no.	I	just	managed	to	talk
about	 Berlin	 every	 now	 and	 again,	 once	 about	 the	 Parlograph,	 that
was	 all.	 And	 I	 do	 so	 need	 your	 nearness,	my	 contact	with	 you,	 but
spoil	it	myself.	Here,	in	the	presence	of	the	four	girls,	I	would	like	to
kick	myself	 for	 it	 in	public.	But	wait	(I	am	saying	“wait”	 to	myself):
after	all,	 this	 evening	we	 shall	be	writing	again	and	 join	each	other
properly	once	more.	At	least	I	have	discovered	how	much	I	belong	to
you,	 in	 the	 city,	 in	 the	 train,	 on	 the	 highway,	 with	 strange
grandparents,	in	the	woods,	on	hillsides,	wherever	I	walk	or	sit.—Last
stop.	This	Sunday	letter	has	come	to	an	end.	I	return	to	the	party,	but
hold	on	to	your	hand,	please,	in	secret.

Franz

From	February	9	to	10,	1913
Dearest,	 once	 again	 it	 is	 so	 late,	 and	 again	 it	 was	 really	 my	 fault
(hurry!	pen,	so	as	to	get	me	very	close	to	Felice,	my	Felice,	after	this
long	time),	but	 I	couldn’t	help	 it.	 I	returned	from	the	walk	a	broken
man;	 I	 felt	 so	 loose	 in	my	 skin	 that	had	anyone	given	me	a	 shake	 I
would	have	fallen	out	of	it	altogether.	So	I	read	aloud	to	my	sister	(my
parents	 had	 spent	 the	 day	with	 relatives	 in	Kolin	 and	had	 only	 just
returned;	welcoming	them	back	also	delayed	me)	something44	dating
from	my	good	days,	perhaps	the	best	thing	I	have	done;	it	was	new	to
her,	and	came,	 I	 think,	 from	the	 time	I	was	waiting	 for	your	second
letter.	 I	 grew	 quite	 hot	 from	 reading,	 and	 if	 I	 hadn’t	 spent	 the
afternoon	 roaming	 the	 highways,	 who	 knows,	 I	 might	 be	 settling



down	and	writing	something	decent	that	could	raise	me	suddenly	out
of	the	depths	into	which	I	am	perceptibly	sinking.	But	it	seems	I	shall
do	nothing	of	 the	sort,	but	go	 to	bed	 just	as	 I	am,	and	certainly	not
write	anything	for	a	long	time,	and	remain	a	plague	to	myself,	to	you,
and	to	the	world.
I	did	not	write	to	you	last	night,	it	got	too	late	because	of	“Michael
Kohlhaas”45	 (have	you	read	 it?	 If	not,	don’t!	 I	 shall	 read	 it	 to	you!);
apart	from	a	short	section	which	I	had	read	the	day	before,	I	read	it	in
one	sitting.	Probably	for	the	tenth	time.	This	is	a	story	I	read	with	true
piety;	it	carries	me	along	on	waves	of	wonder,	and	if	it	weren’t	for	the
rather	weak,	in	part	carelessly	written	ending,	it	would	be	a	thing	of
perfection,	 the	 kind	 of	 perfection	 I	 like	 to	 maintain	 does	 not	 exist.
(For	 I	believe	 that	even	 the	greatest	works	of	 literature	have	a	 little
tail	of	human	frailty	which,	 if	one	is	on	the	 lookout	for	 it,	begins	to
wag	slightly	and	disturbs	the	sublime,	godlike	quality	of	the	whole.)
Dearest,	 please	 tell	 me	 why	 you	 chose	 to	 love	 such	 an	 unhappy
young	 man,	 whose	 unhappiness	 in	 the	 long	 run	 is	 bound	 to	 be
contagious?	 During	 today’s	 outing	 I	 walked	 with	 a	 sensible,	 decent
girl,	whom	 I	have	always	 rather	 liked.	But	 I	 felt	 quite	nauseated	by
the	way	she	complained	of	her	life.	(I	meet	her	once	every	3	months.)
Later,	 however,	when	we	were	 all	 at	 supper	 and	 an	 amusing	 young
man	began	to	tease	her,	her	repartee	was	as	quick	as	a	flash,	and	she
outwitted	 him.	 I	 must	 emanate	 an	 aura	 of	 unhappiness.	 But	 don’t
worry,	dearest,	and	stay	with	me!	Very	close	to	me!

Franz

From	February	10	to	11,	1913
I	went	to	the	Brods’	again	this	evening,	and	even	if	it	may	have	been	a
mistake	 to	 stay	 so	 late	 instead	 of	 going	 home	 and	 doing	 something
sensible,	or	of	pretending	to	myself	to	be	doing	something	sensible,	I
felt	 too	much	 at	 ease	with	 them—I	who	 so	 rarely	 feel	 at	 ease	with
people—to	 make	 up	 my	 mind	 to	 get	 up	 from	 the	 sofa	 and	 say
goodbye.	Besides,	Weltsch	was	also	there,	and	we	laughed	a	lot;	now,
two	hours	later,	I	simply	cannot	understand	how	I	was	able	to	laugh;	I
can	search	myself	 through	and	through	and	 find	no	 trace	of	a	cause
for	laughter	within	myself.	What	could	it	have	been	that	amused	me
so	much?
Sophie,	who	is	very	amiable	to	me	and	from	the	very	beginning	has



been	 in	 the	 habit	 of	 embarrassing	 me,	 even	 if	 unintentionally,	 by
stroking	 or	 taking	 hold	 of	 my	 hand	 during	 a	 conversation,	 had
nothing	 to	 say	 about	 you	 today;	 she	 just	 kept	 on	 talking	 about	 her
husband,	 about	 telegrams,	 express	 letters,	 and	 telephone
conversations.	 “And	 Felice?”	 I	 asked	with	my	 eyes,	 but	 she	 did	 not
understand	 me.	 Only	 once	 were	 you	 mentioned,	 naturally	 without
anyone	having	noticed.	In	the	midst	of	some	other	conversation	I	said
to	Sophie:	“What	was	it	I	wanted	to	ask	you?”	I	repeated	this	several
times,	 which	 sounded	 rather	 stupid,	 but	 it	 did	 seem	 as	 though	 I
couldn’t	 remember.	 But	 what	 else	 could	 I	 do?	 I	 couldn’t	 very	 well
suddenly	yell:	“Now	that’s	enough!	From	now	on	I	want	to	hear	only
about	Felice,	and	nothing	else!”	That	was	what	I	wanted,	believe	me.
After	 all,	 I	 had	 received	 your	 huge	 letter	 this	 morning	 (but	 while
reading	 it,	my	heart	beating	with	 joy	and	comfort,	 I	 kept	 imagining
the	lovely	Sunday	weather	outside	your	window,	and	you	indoors	in
your	 room,	 bent	 over	 the	 letter),	 and	 it	 made	 me	 feel	 a	 man	 of
importance,	but	men	of	importance	are	all	the	more	insatiable.
Dearest,	 you	 evaded	 the	 big	 question.	 I	 don’t	want	 to	 touch	with
even	 a	 single	 thought	 the	 joy	 of	 the	 hours	 to	 be	 spent	with	 you.	 If
everything	were	to	take	place	in	accordance	with	my	feelings	for	you
at	 my	 best	 moments,	 then	 Berlin,	 where	 we	 shall	 be	 side	 by	 side,
would	 not	 be	 in	 Berlin,	 but	 in	 the	 clouds.	 But	 this	 is	 not	what	 Frl.
Lindner	 is	meant	 to	ask;	all	 she	 is	meant	 to	ask	 is	why	 I,	who	 force
myself	 upon	 you	with	 letters,	 refrain	 from	 doing	 so	 in	 person.	 And
you	 are	 meant	 to	 give	 her	 one	 part	 of	 the	 answer,	 and	 perhaps
withhold	 the	other.	After	all,	 she	might	 so	easily	ask.	Will	 you	 then
simply	say	and	think:	“I	don’t	know”?
From	the	picture,	and	from	everything	else	I	have	heard	about	her,	I
imagined	your	 sister	Toni	quite	unlike	your	present	description.	She
struck	me	as	sleepy,	dull,	and	sad,	and	now	she	 is	 just	 the	opposite.
And	quick	witted,	 too—a	quality	 I	both	admire	and	 flee	 from.	 I	 still
know	very	little	about	your	sister	Erna,	only	the	charming	childhood
stories.—Please,	dearest,	wouldn’t	you	lend	me	the	list	of	your	books
for	one	day?	Now	that	 I	am	more	or	 less	 familiar	with	your	 room,	 I
want	to	creep	a	little	way	into	your	cupboards	as	well.

Franz

[IN	 THE	 MARGIN]	 The	 address	 on	 today’s	 letter	 was	 rather	 illegible;	 it
frightened	me,	even	in	retrospect.



From	February	11	to	12,	1913
Dearest	one,	yet	again	it	is	late;	without	accomplishing	anything	I	stay
awake	from	ancient	habit,	as	though	waiting	for	the	rain	from	heaven
that	fails	to	appear.
Hardly	 had	 you	 described	 our	meeting	 in	 Berlin	when	 I	 dreamed

about	 it!	 All	 kinds	 of	 things,	 but	 by	 now	 I	 have	 hardly	 anything
definite	 to	 say	 about	 it,	 all	 that	 remains	 within	 me	 is	 the	 general
feeling	of	a	mixture	of	 sorrow	and	 joy	which	 the	dream	left	behind.
We	went	walking	in	the	streets,	the	neighborhood	strangely	resembled
the	 Altstadter	 Ring	 in	 Prague;	 it	 was	 after	 6	 o’clock	 in	 the	 evening
(possibly	the	actual	time	of	the	dream);	although	not	walking	arm	in
arm,	we	were	closer	 to	each	other	 than	one	 is	when	walking	arm	in
arm.	Oh	God,	how	difficult	 it	 is	to	describe	on	paper	the	invention	I
had	made	 for	walking	not	 arm	 in	 arm,	not	 attracting	 attention,	 and
yet	 very	 close	 to	 you;	when	we	went	 along	 the	Graben	 that	 time,	 I
could	 have	 shown	 you,	 but	 it	 did	 not	 occur	 to	 us	 then.	 You	 were
hurrying	straight	to	your	hotel,	and	I	was	stumbling	along	on	the	edge
of	the	sidewalk,	two	feet	away	from	you.	How	on	earth	can	I	describe
how	we	walked	 in	my	dream?	When	walking	 arm	 in	 arm,	 the	 arms
touch	in	only	two	places,	and	each	person	preserves	his	independence;
but	as	we	walked	our	 shoulders	also	 touched,	and	our	arms	were	 in
contact	all	the	way	down.	But	wait,	I’ll	draw	it.	This	is	arm	in	arm:			

But	this	is	how	we	walked:			

How	do	you	 like	my	drawing?	 I	was	once	 a	 great	 draftsman,	 you
know,	but	then	I	started	to	take	academic	drawing	lessons	with	a	bad
woman	painter	and	ruined	my	talent.	Think	of	that!	But	wait,	one	of
these	 days	 I’ll	 send	 you	 a	 few	 of	 my	 old	 drawings,	 to	 give	 you
something	to	laugh	at.	These	drawings	gave	me	greater	satisfaction	in
those	days—it’s	years	ago—than	anything	else.
Dearest,	don’t	you	have	any	faith	whatever	in	my	business	ability?

Don’t	you	expect	anything	to	come	of	my	suggestions	concerning	the
Parlograph?	You	actually	haven’t	said	a	word	in	reply	to	what	I	wrote
you	 about	 it.	 Can’t	 you	 see	 how	 this	 humiliates	 me?	 It’s	 almost	 as



though	the	moment	you	had	assigned	me	a	place	in	your	office,	you
decided	 to	 throw	 me	 out	 again.	 Pick	 wrote	 to	 me	 again	 today.	 I
enclose	his	 letter	 to	show	you	the	pressure	he	 is	putting	on	me,	and
how	 you	 are	 letting	 me	 down.	 And	 even	 if	 everything	 I	 have	 said
about	it	so	far	is	a	joke	(on	paper	it	almost	looks	as	if	it	were	meant
seriously),	 I	 still	 have	 to	 give	 Pick	 some	 sort	 of	 answer.	 Perhaps	 he
hopes	 to	 make	 a	 lot	 of	 money,	 will	 really	 make	 an	 effort,	 and
eventually	 achieve	 a	 few	 sales.	 So	 wake	 up,	 dearest!	 To	 business!
Whatever	it	may	be	that	drives	you	toward	me	is	to	my	advantage,	for
it	gives	me	you	to	hang	on	to.

Franz

Enclosed:
Otto	Pick	to	Franz	Kafka

Prague,	February	10,	1913
Dear	Herr	Doctor,
I	will	continue	to	have	the	review	of	your	Meditation	reprinted	until
the	 first	 sentence	 is	 correct.	 In	 the	enclosed	copy	of	 the	Pester	Lloyd
there	is,	as	you	see,	a	blank.46	Don’t	hold	it	against	me!
But	 what	 about	 our	 P.[arlograph]?!	 Please	 come	 and	 see	me	 one
day,	 if	 possible	with	 prospectuses.	 I	 have	 also	 got	 Kisch47	 from	 the
Bohemia	interested	in	the	project.	The	bankers,	however,	want	to	see	a
real	P.	in	action	before	starting	negotiations!
On	 the	 21st	 I	 am	 lecturing	 on	 L.	 Schüler,48	 but	 without
Dahlmann.49	She	is	not	free	that	evening.	I	hope	you	will	come	all	the
same;	and	if	possible	see	me	before	then.

Kind	regards,	yours,	Otto	Pick

From	February	12	to	13,	1913
It	 is	 best	 of	 all	when	 your	 letter	 arrives	 first	 thing,	 as	 it	 did	 today;
then	the	entire	day,	from	its	very	beginning,	belongs	to	you.	But	when
your	 letter	 arrives	 later,	 or	 not	 until	 I	 get	 home,	 then	 half	 the	 day
doesn’t	know	to	whom	it	belongs,	and	begins	to	totter	till	it	gives	me
a	 headache.	 But	 there	 must	 be	 other	 reasons	 for	 my	 headaches	 as
well,	for	I	have	them	almost	permanently	now.	I’m	afraid	I	walk	too
little,	sleep	too	little,	and	that	little	badly;	in	short,	I	live	as	though	I
were	writing	well,	which	of	course,	were	it	true,	would	have	the	effect



of	curing	all	ills	and	making	me	happy	into	the	bargain.	But	I	am	not
writing	at	all,	and	am	like	an	old	horse	shut	up	in	its	stable.
Look	 here,	 we	 are	 again	 answering	 or	 anticipating	 each	 other’s
questions	 simultaneously	 overnight.	 On	 Friday	 evening,	 without
realizing	 it	was	 Friday,	 I	 asked	 about	 your	 prayers,	whereupon	 you
went	to	the	synagogue	that	very	Friday.	Yesterday	I	asked	when	I	am
likely	 to	 receive	 the	 prospectuses,	 and	 today	 I	 have	 the	 answer,
though	it	isn’t	very	satisfactory.	(How	is	Pick	to	go	about	it	then,	if	he
is	determined	to	do	business?	Should	he	get	in	touch	with	Adler?	And
how?)	And	finally	in	yesterday’s	letter	Lasker-Schüler	was	mentioned,
and	today	you	ask	about	her.	I	cannot	bear	her	poems;	their	emptiness
makes	 me	 feel	 nothing	 but	 boredom,	 and	 their	 contrived	 verbosity
nothing	but	 antipathy.	Her	 prose	 I	 find	 just	 as	 tiresome	and	 for	 the
same	 reasons;	 it	 is	 the	work	 of	 an	 indiscriminate	 brain	 twitching	 in
the	head	of	an	overwrought	city-dweller.	But	 I	may	be	quite	wrong;
many	 people	 love	 her,	 including	 Werfel,	 who	 talks	 of	 her	 with
genuine	 enthusiasm.	 Yes,	 she	 is	 in	 a	 bad	way;	 I	 believe	 her	 second
husband	 has	 left	 her;	 they	 are	 collecting	 for	 her	 here,	 too;	 I	 had	 to
give	5	kronen,	without	feeling	the	slightest	sympathy	for	her.	I	don’t
quite	know	why,	but	I	always	imagine	her	simply	as	a	drunk,	dragging
herself	through	the	coffeehouses	at	night.	As	you	will	see	from	Pick’s
letter,	he	is	giving	a	lecture	about	her,	and	for	her	benefit.
You	know,	dearest,	I	must	be	careful	not	to	talk	about	strangers	in
my	 letters	 to	 you,	 in	 particular	 about	 people	 I	 find	disagreeable.	As
though	to	revenge	themselves	for	my	criticism,	having	calmly	allowed
themselves	 to	be	described,	 they	 suddenly	 (since	 they	can	no	 longer
be	removed)	start	spreading	themselves	all	over	the	place	and	try	to
hide	you	from	my	view,	dearest,	with	their	loathsome	or	uninteresting
appearance.	Away	with	you,	Lasker-Schüler!	Come	here,	dearest!	No
one	 is	 to	 be	 between	 us,	 no	 one	 around	 us.	 You	 are	 right;	 a	 sister
doesn’t	belong	to	one	entirely,	and	one	may	be	allowed	to	get	tired	of
her.	 But	 what	 happens	 if	 one	 lacks	 the	 power	 to	 win	 a	 person
entirely?

Franz

[IN	 THE	 MARGIN]	 What	 did	 the	 professor	 say	 when	 you	 made	 the
suggestion	about	your	sister	Erna?



February	13,	1913
I	 stood	 by	 the	 balcony	 door	 for	 a	 long	 time,	 looking	 outside	 for	 an
answer	 to	 the	 question	 whether	 or	 not	 to	 go	 to	 Dresden.	 Though
indeed	I	don’t	know	what	you	are	doing	in	Dresden,	whether	you	are
going	 with	 your	 mother,	 whether	 you	 have	 some	 special	 business
(which	 the	 suddenness	 of	 the	 journey	would	 suggest,	 as	well	 as	 the
fact	that	you	seem	to	intend	to	spend	the	night	in	Dresden),	in	which
case	 I	 would	 be	 in	 your	 way,	 even	 if	 I	 were	 only	 to	 wait	 for	 you
outside	the	hotel,	and	try	to	take	up	a	position	from	which	I	could	see
you	 eating	 your	 lunch.	But	 in	 actual	 fact	 such	 considerations	would
not	prevent	me	from	going.	It	is	rather	the	state	I	am	in,	which	even
here	 at	home	among	my	 family	 assigns	me	 to	my	dark	 room	 rather
than	to	the	brightly	lit	living	room,	which	makes	this	kind	of	journey
in	itself	an	immense	undertaking;	and	since	you,	dearest,	would	be	the
object	 of	 this	 journey,	 a	 dangerous	 undertaking	 as	 well,	 for	 what
would	you	say,	what	would	your	sister	say,	if,	catching	sight	of	me	for
the	 first	 time,	 she	were	 to	 see	me	 as	 I	 am!	No,	 no,	 no.	 I	 shall	 stay
where	I	am,	only	a	little	sadder	than	usual,	a	little	more	troubled,	for
you	are	nearer	than	usual	and	yet	beyond	my	reach.	Old	people,	little
old	ladies	would	decide	to	take	this	short	journey	without	a	moment’s
hesitation,	but	I	can’t.
Farewell,	dearest,	and	spend	a	 few	peaceful	hours.	Forgive	me	 for

persecuting	 you	 with	 letters	 even	 in	 Dresden.	 A	 Sunday	 letter	 is
awaiting	 you	 in	 Berlin,	 there’s	 nothing	 new	 in	 it,	 just	 the	 endless
litany	of	the	past	week.

Franz

From	February	13	to	14,	1913
Today’s	letter	didn’t	arrive	until	the	second	mail.	Does	this	mean	that
your	eye	was	still	 inflamed	in	the	morning,	and	you	didn’t	go	to	the
office?	 But	 in	 this	 case	 perhaps	 you	would	 have	 told	me	 in	 a	 short
postscript?	Was	 it	 really	only	a	 speck	of	dust	or	a	hair	 that	got	 into
your	 eye?	 That	 would	 irritate	 but	 surely	 not	 inflame	 the	 eye?	 And
isn’t	there	anyone	who	knows	how	to	fold	back	the	eyelid	so	that	the
eye	can	be	cleaned?	Although	major	and	bloody	operations	didn’t	use
to	 worry	 me	 much,	 I	 would	 never	 be	 able	 to	 carry	 out,	 or	 even
witness,	such	minor	manipulations	being	performed	on	the	body,	for
they	 remind	 me	 or	 make	 me	 aware	 or	 make	 me	 believe	 that	 the



human	 frame	 is	 horribly	 primitive,	 and	 includes	 so	 much	 that	 is
mechanical	 within	 the	 organic.	 Perhaps	 you	 too	 are	 afraid	 to	 have
your	 eyelid	 folded	back?	The	 thought	 that	 this	 task,	 albeit	 perfectly
harmless,	should	be	performed	on	you	really	makes	me	shudder.
Dearest,	 today	 would	 be	 a	 good	 opportunity	 for	 the	 following
promise:	 You	 undertake,	 and	 name	 a	 reliable	 surety	 for	 this
undertaking,	 to	 write	 and	 tell	 me	 about	 any	 indisposition—distant
worries	do	little	to	prevent	them—at	once,	clearly	and	truthfully,	and
in	such	a	way	that	no	graver	interpretation,	in	addition	to	the	actual
written	words,	 can	 spring	 to	mind.	 Please	 understand	 that	 I	 am	not
even	 asking	 you	 to	 exaggerate	 for	 the	 worse	 and	 make	 the
exaggeration	a	transparent	one,	as	I	normally	do—admittedly	less	out
of	consideration	for	you	than	on	account	of	my	temperament.
Yesterday	 I	 received	 the	 proofs	 of	 your	 short	 story	 [“The
Judgment”].	How	beautifully	our	names	unite	below	the	title!	When
you	 eventually	 read	 the	 story,	 I	 hope	 you	won’t	 regret	 ever	 having
consented	 to	your	name	being	mentioned	(of	course	 it	 is	only	Felice
B.).	For	no	one,	no	matter	to	whom	you	may	show	it,	could	like	the
story.	You	can	take	comfort,	at	 least	some	kind	of	comfort,	 from	the
fact	 that	 I	would	have	added	your	name	even	had	you	 forbidden	 it,
for	 the	 dedication,	 although	 only	 a	 tiny	 and	 dubious	 one,	 is
nevertheless	an	unquestionable	sign	of	my	love	for	you,	and	this	love
exists	not	by	permission,	but	from	compulsion.—In	any	case,	there	is
still	plenty	of	time	for	you	to	protest;	the	publication	of	the	book	has
been	delayed,	it	will	be	months	before	it	comes	out.——
Dearest!	Please	note	how	a	time	of	not	writing—it	seems	to	stretch
endlessly	ahead—confuses	me.	The	entire	evening	I	had	been	looking
forward	to	writing	to	you,	and	now	that	I	am	doing	it,	I	am	tired,	or
behaving	 as	 though	 I	were,	 and	 close	my	 letter	with	 dull	 eyes,	 and
pursed	lips.

Franz

From	February	14	to	15,	1913
Even	 if	 I	 had	 not	 intended	 for	 some	 days	 to	 go	 to	 the	 theater	 this
evening	to	see	Hidalla50	(Wedekind	and	his	wife	are	in	it,	of	course),	I
would	inevitably	have	had	to	do	so,	dearest,	after	your	second	letter
today.	For	no	matter	how	far	apart	we	are,	and	no	matter	how	little
anyone	notices	it	or	at	any	rate	wants	to	believe	it,	we	are	linked	by	a



strong	 cord,	 even	 if	 it	 should	 not	 please	 God	 to	 turn	 it	 into	 an
encircling	 chain.	 But	 if	 you	 go	 to	 Professor	 Bernhardi,	 dearest,	 you
drag	me	along	by	that	inevitable	cord,	and	there	is	a	danger	that	we
both	succumb	to	that	kind	of	bad	literature,	which	the	greater	part	of
Schnitzler51	 represents	 for	 me.	 But	 to	 guard	 ourselves	 against	 this
danger	 it	was	my	duty	not	 to	give	way	completely	 to	 the	 tug	of	 the
cord,	 and	 to	 go	 to	 Hidalla	 instead,	 to	 steer	 you	 away	 from	 the
Professor	a	little	and	let	a	few	true,	well-cut	Wedekindian	words	reach
your	 heart,	 beating	 as	 it	 does	 for	Professor	 Bernhardi.	 Thus,	without
any	 damage	 to	 the	 soul,	 I	 may	 be	 able	 to	 bear	 the	 Schnitzlerian
impressions	which	are	blowing	toward	me	this	evening,	and	which	I
am	 absorbing	 greedily	 because	 they	 come	 from	 you,	 dearest.	 For	 I
don’t	 like	 Schnitzler	 at	 all,	 and	 hardly	 respect	 him;	 no	 doubt	 he	 is
capable	 of	 certain	 things,	 but	 for	 me	 his	 great	 plays	 and	 his	 great
prose	are	full	of	a	truly	staggering	mass	of	the	most	sickening	drivel.
It	is	impossible	to	be	too	hard	on	him.	Those	plays	of	his	that	I	have
seen	(Interlude,	The	Call	 of	 Life,	Medardus)	 dissolved	 even	 before	my
watching	eyes,	and	I	forgot	them	while	listening	to	them.	Only	when
looking	at	his	photograph—that	bogus	dreaminess,	that	sentimentality
I	wouldn’t	touch	even	with	the	tips	of	my	fingers—can	I	see	how	he
could	have	developed	in	this	way	from	his	partly	excellent	early	work
(Anatol,	La	Ronde,	Lieutenant	Gustl).—Wedekind	I	won’t	even	mention
in	the	same	letter.
Enough,	enough!	Let	me	quickly	get	rid	of	Schnitzler	who	is	trying
to	 come	between	us,	 like	 Lasker-Schüler	 the	 other	 day.	Dearest,	 did
you	go	 to	 the	 theater	alone?	And	why	 so	 suddenly?	Does	 this	mean
that	your	eye	is	all	right,	quite	all	right	again?	After	supper	just	now	I
saw	 a	 picture	 of	 your	 new	 princely	 bridal	 couple	 in	 the	 evening
paper.52	The	two	of	them	walking	in	a	park	in	Karlsruhe,	arm	in	arm;
but	not	 satisfied	with	 that,	 their	 fingers	are	 intertwined	as	well.	 If	 I
didn’t	stare	at	those	intertwined	fingers	for	five	minutes,	then	it	must
have	been	ten	minutes.
This	afternoon	I	could	have	done	with	a	hole	to	disappear	into;	for
in	the	current	issue	of	März	I	read	Max’s	review	of	my	book;53	I	knew
it	was	 coming	out,	 but	had	not	 seen	 it.	A	 few	 reviews	have	already
appeared,	 needless	 to	 say	 all	 of	 them	 by	 friends,	 valueless	 in	 their
exaggerated	praise,	valueless	 in	 their	comments,	and	explicable	only
as	a	sign	of	misguided	friendship,	an	overrating	of	the	printed	word,	a
misunderstanding	 of	 the	 general	 public’s	 attitude	 to	 literature.
Ultimately	that	is	what,	on	the	whole,	they	have	in	common	with	the



majority	of	 reviews,	and	 if	 they	did	not	act	as	a	 sad	 though	quickly
spent	 spur	 to	one’s	 vanity,	 one	might	 easily	 accept	 them.	But	Max’s
review	is	more	than	excessive.	Just	because	his	friendship	for	me,	in
its	most	human	aspect,	has	 roots	 far	deeper	 than	 those	of	 literature,
and	for	this	reason	is	effective	long	before	literature	gets	a	chance,	he
overestimates	me	 to	 a	 degree	 that	makes	me	 feel	 embarrassed,	 and
vain,	and	conceited,	whereas	with	his	literary	experience	and	powers
of	 discernment,	 he	 has	 at	 his	 disposal	 vast	 reserves	 of	 genuine
judgment,	which	 is	nothing	but	 judgment.	Nevertheless,	 that	 is	how
he	 writes.	 If	 I	 myself	 were	 working,	 were	 in	 the	 flow	 of	 work	 and
borne	along	by	it,	I	wouldn’t	have	to	give	a	thought	to	the	review;	in
my	mind	I	could	kiss	Max	for	his	love,	and	the	review	itself	would	not
affect	me	in	any	way!	But	as	things	are——	And	the	dreadful	thing	is
that	 I	 have	 to	 say	 to	 myself	 that	 my	 attitude	 to	 Max’s	 work	 is	 no
different	 than	 his	 to	mine,	 except	 that	 sometimes	 I	 am	 aware	 of	 it,
whereas	he	never	is.
But	 are	 there	 really	no	pleasanter	 Sunday	 thoughts	 for	 you	 in	my

silly	head,	dearest,	dearest!	If	I	did	not	know	that	all	the	evil	flowing
from	me	 toward	you	were	 inevitably	 turned	 to	good	by	you,	best	of
creatures—honestly,	I	shouldn’t	tell	you	these	things.
I	 enclose	 a	 letter	 from	my	Madrid	 uncle	 [Alfred	 Löwy]	 (he	 is	 60

years	old,	director	of	railways)	for	your	kind	consideration.	Wouldn’t
you	 too,	 dearest,	 let	me	 read	 an	 occasional	 letter	 from	 one	 of	 your
relatives,	 from	 your	 sister	 in	 Budapest,	 for	 instance,	 or	 the	 one	 in
Dresden?	So	that	I	can	begin	to	understand	the	circle	around	you	into
which	I	have	insinuated	myself.	Nor	have	I	received	your	list	of	books
yet.	 Can	 one	 ask	 too	 much	 even	 of	 the	 person	 one	 loves?	 If	 I	 do,
dearest,	then	say	so.	It	would	be	a	poor	exchange	if,	by	my	acquiring
knowledge	 of	 you,	 your	 heart	 were	 to	 develop	 some	 resistance,
however	small.

Franz

February	16,	1913
Dearest,	just	a	few	words	in	the	greatest	haste	so	as	to	be	with	you	by
the	 first	mail.	 Please	 forget	 the	 letter	 you	 received	 yesterday,54	 the
greater	part	of	which	was	so	unpleasant.	I	wouldn’t	have	mailed	it	if	it
hadn’t	been	so	late	at	night	and	I’d	had,	or	been	capable	of,	another
letter.	 But	 the	 regularity	 of	 our	 correspondence	 overrode	 all	 other



considerations.	What’s	more,	I	may	have	felt—a	cunning	excuse—the
resistance	you	felt,	at	least	at	that	time,	to	one	of	my	Sunday	letters.
But	 whatever	 it	 may	 be,	 I	 have	 amply	 atoned	 for	 that	 letter,	 and
perhaps	 for	 a	 great	many	 other	 things	 as	well	 during	 the	 night,	 the
greater	 part	 of	 which,	 despite	 immense	 sleepiness,	 I	 spent	 awake
owing	to	a	beastly	brand-new	pain	in	my	right	shoulder,	which	even
made	me	resort	to	prayer.	But	it	has	gone	again	now,	and	I	accept	it
gladly	 as	 a	 penance.	 What	 nonsense	 am	 I	 talking	 again,	 providing
myself	with	material	for	further	penance.	I	am	a	very	unhappy	human
being	 and	 you,	 dearest,	 simply	 had	 to	 be	 summoned	 to	 create	 an
equilibrium	for	all	this	misery.

Franz

February	16,	1913
Again,	 dearest,	 only	 a	 few	 hurried	 words.	 I	 slept	 a	 little,	 then	 lay
awake	 for	 a	 very	 long	 time,	 so	 it’s	 late.	 I	 hope	 your	 Sunday	 was
pleasanter	than	mine.	In	front	of	me	lies	a	postcard	from	Max	and	Elsa
[Brod]	from	Saint-Raphaël	on	the	Riviera,	or	rather	the	Côte	d’Azur.
Actually,	I	asked	them55	to	find	a	place	for	me	for	the	autumn	where
it	 is	 hot,	 where	 one	 can	 live	 as	 a	 vegetarian,	 where	 one	 feels
permanently	well,	where	even	alone	and	with	no	one	to	talk	to,	one
does	 not	 feel	 forsaken	 (not	 that	 one	 really	 has	 to	 be	 alone),	 where
even	a	blockhead	can	pick	up	some	Italian,	etc.,	in	short,	a	beautiful,
impossible	 place.	Now	Max	 says	 Saint-Raphaël	 is	 just	 that.	What	do
you	think,	dearest?
Well,	now	I	shall	run	a	little	way	toward	you,	though	of	course	only
as	far	as	the	station.

Franz

From	February	16	to	17,	1913
Dearest,	 this	 evening	 on	 my	 long	 walk	 alone	 in	 the	 cold	 (have	 I
caught	a	chill	again?	Real	or	imaginary	shivers	are	running	down	my
back)	through	the	town,	this	way	and	that,	over	Hradčany,	around	the
cathedral,	and	through	the	Belvedere,	I	wrote	endless	letters	to	you	in
my	mind.	And	although	you	cannot	have	learned	any	details	from	this
kind	of	writing,	you	must	have	realized	once	again,	dearest	(if	not,	I
wouldn’t	know	what	to	do),	that	I,	above	and	beneath	all	the	things	I



write	 to	 you,	 things	 which,	 considering	 the	 moods	 and	 states	 of
weakness	 making	 up	 my	 existence,	 easily	 may	 appear	 repulsive,
artificial,	superficial,	coquettish,	false,	malicious,	incoherent,	or	rather
not	appear,	they	undeniably	are	so—that	I	nevertheless,	nevertheless,
deep	down	in	the	depth	which	is	occasionally	closed	even	to	myself,
recognize	 all	 the	 bad	 things	 I	 do	 and	write,	 I	 assess	 them	 correctly,
and	weep	with	helplessness.	That	you	love	me,	Felice,	certainly	makes
me	happy,	but	it	doesn’t	make	me	feel	safe,	for	you	might	be	deluding
yourself;	with	my	letters	I	may	be	performing	some	kind	of	trick	that
deludes	you.	After	all,	you	have	hardly	seen	me,	hardly	heard	me	talk,
hardly	suffered	from	my	silences,	know	nothing	about	the	accidental
or	 inevitable	 unpleasantnesses	 my	 presence	 might	 cause	 you.	 My
safety	rests	far	more	in	the	fact	that	I	love	you,	that	during	that	short
evening	I	recognized	you	for	what	you	are,	felt	gripped	by	you,	that	I
did	not	 shrink	 from	 this	 love	but	passed	 this	 test,	 that	 this	 love	has
become	 integrated	with	my	nature	as	 though	 it	had	been	born	with
me,	but	had	only	now	been	recognized.
Do	 not	 delude	 yourself,	 dearest,	 about	 the	 fright	 you	 had	 on
learning	 that	 your	mother	 had	 read	my	 letters.	 (But	what	 a	 strange
man	 your	 father	 is!	 He	 looks	 sedate	 and	 serious,	 loves	 a	 gay	 life,
weeps	 over	 novels,	 stands	 up	 for	 you	 against	 your	 mother	 in	 this
seemingly	very	dubious	affair!)	Actually,	it	was	not	your	mother	you
were	frightened	of.	I’m	afraid	it	was	not	that;	just	try	and	think	about
it.	After	 all,	 your	 position	within	 the	 family	 is	 independent	 enough;
your	mother	 had	 read	my	 letters	 once	 before,	 and	 as	 far	 as	 I	 know
there	were	no	particular	consequences.	The	actual	effect	of	this	news
was	rather	that	the	small	(in	reality,	my	God,	immensely	vast)	space
into	which	 you,	 dearest,	 had	 come	 to	 join	me	 (just	 as	 now	 in	 your
dream	you	 leaped	over	 the	balustrade	 in	dreamy	recklessness	 to	 the
man	 standing	 below)	 had	 now	 been	 pierced	 by	 your	 mother’s	 cold
objective	eye;	this	had	made	you	shudder	and	caused	you	to	wonder
—by	allowing	you	to	view	from	afar	that	which	hitherto	you	had	seen
only	from	very	close	quarters.	If	only	we	were	alone	again,	and	never
disturbed!

Franz

From	February	17	to	18,	1913
Just	imagine,	dearest,	my	misery,	my	rage,	my	anxiety,	my	worry,	my



love.	 I	 was	 with	 the	 Brods	 this	 evening	 in	 their	 new	 apartment
(Sophie	has	been	gone	for	ages,	Max	returns	on	Thursday),	then	went
quietly	for	a	walk,	looking	forward	to	being	able	to	write	to	you	soon
in	peace,	to	going	to	bed	soon	and	ridding	myself	of	my	weariness	and
my	cold	by	means	of	a	tremendous	sleep.	Then	whom	should	I	meet
but	Pick,	and	he	drags	me	along	(since	I	never	meet	people	except	as
a	 representative	 of	 my	 Institute,	 I	 imagine	 I	 have	 to	 give	 in	 to
everyone),	and	so	off	I	go,	and	we	fritter	away	the	night,	though	not
exactly	 bored,	 sitting	 in	 a	 coffeehouse;	 what’s	 more,	 in	 an	 empty,
unheated	coffeehouse,	and	now	at	2:30	A.M.	I	am	sitting	in	my	room,
and,	in	spite	of	its	warmth,	cold	air	is	running	across	my	back,	heaven
knows	where	from.
Dearest,	there	is	one	thing	I	have	to	tell	you,	though;	you	must	have
read	my	Sunday	letter56	rather	carelessly;	there	is	no	other	possibility;
there	was	 unpleasantness	 enough	 in	 that	 letter	 (one	 day	 I’ll	 explain
this	to	you)	and	I’m	glad	about	the	careless	reading,	and	beg	you	not
to	 re-read	 it—but	 there	 cannot,	 could	 not	 have	 been	 so	much	 as	 a
word	about	a	possible	breaking	of	the	cord	that	joins	us.	Dearest,	I	am
not	so	crazy	as	to	pass	judgment	on	myself,	or	even	to	hint	at	it—on
myself	who	is	more	part	of	you	than	my	picture	that	hangs	from	your
neck.	How	could	you	have	read	anything	of	the	kind	into	my	letter?
With	what	kind	of	eyes	did	you	read	it?
And	what	hand,	 in	what	 dream,	made	 you	write	 that	 I	 have	won
you	completely?	Dearest,	that’s	what	you	believe	for	a	brief	moment,
at	 a	 distance.	 To	 win	 you	 at	 close	 quarters,	 and	 for	 good,	 requires
greater	 strength	 than	 the	 play	 of	muscles	 that	 drives	my	pen.	Don’t
you	yourself	believe	this,	when	you	think	about	it?	It	does	seem	to	me
sometimes	that	this	communication	by	letter,	beyond	which	I	have	an
almost	constant	longing	for	reality,	is	the	only	kind	of	communication
in	keeping	with	my	wretchedness	(my	wretchedness	which	of	course	I
do	not	always	feel	as	wretchedness),	and	that	the	transgression	of	this
limit	 imposed	on	me	would	 lead	us	both	 to	disaster.	Dearest,	 I	have
enough	 imagination	 to	 say	 to	 myself	 that	 I,	 when	 thinking	 only	 of
myself,	must	 stay	with	you,	pressed	 firmly	 to	you,	and	never	 let	go;
equally,	when	thinking	only	of	you	(how	we	blend,	you	and	I,	but	in
my	mind	how	inseparable,	that’s	the	worst	of	it),	I	should	do	all	in	my
power	to	keep	away	from	you.	Oh	God,	how	will	this	end!—Now,	my
dearest	 Felice,	here	 I	 am	about	 to	mail	 this	dreadful	 letter,	 but	 it	 is
now	past	3	o’clock	and	I	cannot	write	another.	I	only	want	to	add	that



everything	 you	 dislike	 about	 the	 last	 one	 is	 neither	 true	 nor	meant
that	way;	 though	 of	 course	 it	 is	 perfectly	 true,	 and	 also	meant	 that
way,	but	I	love	you	so	much	that	if	you	demand	it	with	so	much	as	a
glance,	 I	 can	 also	 say	 what	 is	 untrue	 and,	 what’s	 more,	 believe	 it.
There	are	times,	Felice,	when	I	feel	you	have	so	much	power	over	me
that	 I	 think	 you	 could	 change	me	 into	 a	man	 capable	 of	 doing	 the
obvious.

Franz

[LETTERHEAD:	Workers’	Accident	Insurance	Institute]
February	18,	1913

Dearest,	I	offended	you	with	yesterday’s	 letter.	At	the	very	mouth	of
the	mailbox	 I	 wanted	 to	 withdraw	 it,	 but	 tell	 me	what	 I	 am	 to	 do
when	 a	 moment	 like	 yesterday’s	 suddenly	 comes	 over	 me,	 in	 the
middle	of	the	night	at	that.	Don’t	I	have	to	write	it	down,	or	should	I
keep	 it	 to	 myself?	 In	 the	 last	 few	 days	 something	 inside	 me	 has
certainly	not	been	quite	 right,	 sentences	 I	don’t	want	keep	 thrusting
themselves	into	my	letters;	it’s	as	though	they	came	from	outside,	and
yet	 they	 must	 surely	 stem	 from	 an	 obscure	 source	 within.	 Dearest,
please	ignore	it,	suffer	it	in	silence,	or	reproach	me,	but	stay	with	me,
and	don’t	be	sad,	and	don’t	cry,	and	keep	me	with	you.

Franz

From	February	18	to	19,	1913
Help	me,	dearest,	 I	beg	you,	 to	put	right	the	damage	I	have	done	in
the	last	few	days.	Perhaps	in	fact	nothing	whatever	has	happened,	and
you	wouldn’t	have	noticed	anything	if	I	hadn’t	shouted	about	it,	but	I
am	driven	by	this	feeling	of	anxiety	in	the	midst	of	my	lethargy,	and	I
write,	 or	 fear	 I	may	 at	 any	moment	write,	 irresponsible	 things.	 The
wrong	sentences	 lie	 in	wait	about	my	pen,	 twine	 themselves	around
its	 point,	 and	 are	 dragged	 along	 into	 the	 letters.	 I	 am	 not	 of	 the
opinion	 that	 one	 can	 ever	 lack	 the	 power	 to	 express	 perfectly	what
one	wants	to	write	or	say.	Observations	on	the	weakness	of	language,
and	comparisons	between	the	limitations	of	words	and	the	infinity	of
feelings,	 are	 quite	 fallacious.	 The	 infinite	 feeling	 continues	 to	 be	 as
infinite	in	words	as	it	was	in	the	heart.	What	is	clear	within	is	bound
to	 become	 so	 in	 words	 as	 well.	 This	 is	 why	 one	 need	 never	 worry



about	 language,	 but	 at	 sight	 of	 words	 may	 often	 worry	 about
oneself.57	After	all,	who	knows	within	himself	how	things	 really	are
with	him?	This	tempestuous	or	floundering	or	morasslike	inner	self	is
what	 we	 really	 are,	 but	 by	 the	 secret	 process	 by	 which	 words	 are
forced	out	of	us,	our	self-knowledge	is	brought	to	light,	and	though	it
may	still	be	veiled,	yet	 it	 is	 there	before	us,	wonderful	or	terrible	to
behold.
So	protect	me,	dearest,	 from	these	horrible	words	of	which	I	have
recently	 been	 delivering	myself.	 Tell	me	 that	 you	 understand	 it	 all,
and	yet	go	on	loving	me.	The	other	day	I	wrote	some	offensive	things
about	 Lasker-Schüler	 and	Schnitzler.	How	very	 right	 I	was!	And	yet
they	both	soar	like	angels	over	the	abyss	in	which	I	lie	prostrate.	And
Max’s	praise!	He	doesn’t	actually	praise	my	book;	after	all,	 the	book
exists,	 and	 his	 judgment	 could	 be	 examined,	 should	 anyone	 feel	 so
inclined;	but	it	is	me	he	praises,	and	this	is	the	most	ridiculous	of	all.
For	where	am	I?	Who	can	examine	me?	I	wish	I	had	a	strong	hand	for
the	sole	purpose	of	thrusting	it	into	this	incoherent	construction	that	I
am.	And	yet	what	I	am	saying	here	is	not	even	precisely	my	opinion,
not	 even	 precisely	 my	 opinion	 at	 this	 moment.	 When	 I	 look	 into
myself	I	see	so	much	that	is	obscure	and	still	in	flux	that	I	cannot	even
properly	explain	or	fully	accept	the	dislike	I	feel	for	myself.
Dearest,	what	 do	 you	 say	when	 you	 come	 face	 to	 face	with	 such
chaos?	 Is	 it	not	 sadder	and	more	 repellent	 for	 the	observer	 than	 for
him	 who	 experiences	 it?	 Certainly,	 incomparably	 sadder	 and	 more
repellent.	 I	 can	 imagine	 the	 strength	 it	 must	 take	 not	 to	 run	 away
from	it.	While	I,	as	I	freely	admit,	write	it	all	down	quite	calmly.

Franz

From	February	19	to	20,	1913
I	who	am	so	accustomed	to	toying	with	imaginary	ideas	that	I	cannot
discard	 the	 habit	 in	 real	 life,	 even	when	 the	menacing	 heartbeat	 is
there	 to	 remind	 me	 that	 this	 time	 it	 is	 real	 life—I	 am	 greatly
saddened,	dearest,	by	your	remark	about	my	 journey	to	 the	South.	 I
did	not,	as	you	seem	to	think,	submit	the	plan	simply	for	your	advice
(because	as	far	as	I	am	concerned	it	makes	no	difference	where	I	go,
for	with	the	exception	of	a	few	surprising	moments,	I	won’t	feel	well
anywhere),	 and	 even	 though	 I	 knew	 that	 in	 the	 end	 it	would	be	no
more	than	advice,	which	I	was	prepared	to	accept	as	a	blessing	for	my



journey—nevertheless,	between	the	one	kind	of	advice	and	the	other,
I	miss	the	connecting	link,	without	which	my	imagination	cannot	be
appeased,	since	with	an	indestructible	and	desperate	yearning	it	wants
to	pull	you	along.
Has	the	bad	day	passed,	and	your	suffering	ceased?	How	deeply	you
can	 sympathize,	 and	 how	 deeply	 you	 are	 shaken	 by	 sympathy!	 In
precisely	the	same	or	even	worse	circumstances	I	should	undoubtedly
have	stood	by	unmoved;	on	the	other	hand,	I	could	neither	have	made
the	girl	pour	out	her	grief	to	such	an	extent,	nor	soothed	her	as	much
by	my	presence,	as	you	certainly	did—I	can	feel	it	in	my	own	heart—
although	 you	 do	 not	 mention	 it.	 What	 latent	 strength	 you	 have,
dearest!	The	fact	that	you	yourself	are	overwhelmed	by	it	only	proves
its	 greatness.	 I	 cannot	 comfort	 anyone,	 because	 words	 fail	 me,	 but
words	are	not	capricious.	Words	do	not	fail	one	out	of	caprice.	In	the
past,	 when	 I	 had	 less	 insight	 into	 myself	 and	 thought	 I	 could	 not
disregard	the	world	for	a	single	moment,	on	the	childish	assumption
that	 this	 was	 where	 the	 danger	 lay,	 and	 that	 the	 “I”	 would	 adjust
automatically,	 without	 trouble	 or	 hesitation,	 according	 to	 the
observations	made	 in	 the	outside	world—at	 that	 time,	no,	not	 really
even	then,	it	was	rather	that	I	was	always	sunk	within	myself,	then	as
now.	The	only	difference	is	that	today	there	are	moments	(a	substitute
for	 the	 past	 erroneous	 assumptions)	 when	 I	 imagine	myself	 writing
these	 things	 at	 the	 foot	 and	 in	 the	 shadow	 of	 a	 mountain,	 whose
summit	I	may	one	day	be	allowed	to	reach	by	climbing	or	soaring.
But	 for	 some	 time	now	 I	have	not	 answered	a	 single	question,	no
longer	write	 anything	 real,	 just	 because	 the	unreal	 is	 threatening	 to
obscure	 the	 most	 beautiful	 reality,	 and	 I	 must	 try,	 by	 means	 of
writing,	 to	 drive	 it	 away.	 Dearest,	 be	 patient	 (just	 now	 I	 hear,	 it	 is
getting	on	 for	2	o’clock,	 cannon	 fire,	 one	 shot	 after	 another;	 I	 don’t
know	any	reason	for	it	and	am	trembling	and	my	cheeks	are	icy	cold,
as	 though	 it	 directly	 concerned	 us,	 you	 and	 me).	 It	 is	 quiet	 again.
Well,	 patience,	 dearest.	 I	 dare	 not	 ask	more,	 but	 that	 in	 itself	 is	 an
enormity.

Franz

From	February	20	to	21,	1913
Late,	 late.	 Wasted	 another	 evening	 with	 various	 people.	 Without
support—since	I	am	not	writing,	and	you	are	in	Berlin—I	allow	myself



to	be	dragged	wherever	anyone	pleases.	A	young	woman	talked	about
her	 wild	 little	 boy,	 and	 this	 was	 really	 the	 best	 part	 of	 it,	 but	 I
couldn’t	 really	 bear	 even	 that,	 my	 eyes	 shot	 indifferent—though	 I
found	her	attractive—glances	at	her	and	I	probably	embarrassed	her
with	 these	 mechanical	 eye	 movements;	 I	 bit	 my	 lips	 to	 stop	 my
attention	from	wandering,	yet	in	spite	of	all	my	efforts	I	wasn’t	there
at	all,	but	was	definitely	nowhere	else,	either;	so	perhaps	I	didn’t	exist
at	all	during	those	two	hours?	That	must	be	it,	for	my	presence	would
have	been	more	convincing	had	I	been	asleep	in	my	chair.
But	to	make	up	for	it	I	had	a	pleasant	morning.	When	I	went	to	the
office	I	still	felt	everything	was	so	beastly	and	boring	that	on	my	way,
although	it	was	not	particularly	late,	I	suddenly	broke	into	a	trot,	and
for	no	other	 reason	 than	 to	bring	a	 little	motion	 into	 the	vileness	of
the	 world,	 thereby	 making	 it	 more	 bearable.	 But	 when	 I	 had	 your
letter	and	read	what	I	had	been	hoping	to	read	all	through	the	night—
that	 you	 want	 to	 come	 with	 me	 to	 Saint-Raphaël,	 or	 are	 at	 least
considering	 it,	 then	 the	world	 in	which	such	 things	are	still	possible
began	to	take	on	a	look	it	hasn’t	had	for	weeks	on	end.	So	you	would
come	with	me,	we	would	be	there	together,	we	would	stand	side	by
side	at	the	railings	on	the	seafront,	sit	side	by	side	on	a	bench	under
palm	 trees,	 everything	 that	 happened	would	 be	 happening	 “side	 by
side.”	 The	 very	 heart	 in	 which	 I	 have	 longed	 to	 find	 shelter	 from
everything	 and	 forever	would	 be	 beating	 at	my	 side.	 I	 can	 still	 feel
shudders	 running	 down	my	 face.	 Imagining	 the	 impossible	must	 be
like	this;	anyway	you	only	wrote	it	as	a	fairy	tale:	“I	shall	look	for	a
pretty	 little	place	 for	you,	 and	 then	 I	 shall	 leave	you	alone.”	 Listen,
dearest,	 the	 very	 impossibility	 of	 it	 is	 in	 keeping	with	 the	way	 you
express	 it,	 for	 even	 if	 one	 after	 another	 the	 miracles,	 which	 are	 a
prerequisite	 for	 a	 trip	 together,	 should	 come	 to	 pass,	 and	 we	 were
standing	 beside	 the	 train	 that	 was	 due	 to	 leave	 for	 Genoa	 the	 very
next	minute—I	should	have	 to	 stay	behind	after	all,	 it	would	be	my
unquestionable	 duty.	 In	 my	 present	 state,	 for	 example,	 or	 in
recognition	 of	 the	 permanent	 possibility	 of	 being	 in	 such	 a	 state,	 I
could	never	dare	wish	to	be	your	traveling	companion.	Alone,	in	the
corner	of	a	compartment,	that’s	where	I	belong;	that’s	where	I	should
stay.	My	contact	with	you,	which	I	am	trying	to	maintain	with	my	last
ounce	 of	 strength,	 must	 never	 be	 endangered	 by	 such	 a	 traveling
companionship.

Franz



From	February	21	to	22,	1913
Today	I	was	wondering	what,	supposing	I	were	you,	my	idea	of	myself
would	be	if	I	had	nothing	to	go	on	but	last	week’s	letters,	apart	from
the—for	you	rather	unimpressive—hour	of	our	actual	meeting.	They
are	surely	of	a	kind	to	refute	and	make	one	forget	whatever	may	have
been	constructive	in	earlier	letters,	even	though	when	writing	them	I
felt	the	desire,	admittedly	impotent,	to	make	them	even	more	incisive
in	this	very	respect;	in	fact	I	could	hardly	re-read	one	of	these	letters
without	repugnance,	primarily	because—apart	from	all	the	other	more
obvious	reasons—I	didn’t	feel	stung	by	them,	either	deeply	enough	or
often	enough.	Wouldn’t	 these	 letters	 inevitably	destroy	any	 idea	you
may	 have	 of	 me?	 If	 proof	 were	 not	 there	 before	 you,	 could	 you
imagine,	 judging	from	your	past	experiences,	a	human	being	leading
as	 useless	 a	 life	 as	 I	 do,	 and	who	 is	 alive	 nevertheless,	 and	 by	 being
alive	achieves	no	more	than	to	run	around	an	enormous	hole	and	to
guard	 it.	 Doesn’t	 this	 almost	make	 you	 believe,	 dearest,	 that	 rather
than	a	human	being	it	is	some	misguided	spirit	that	is	writing	to	you?
And	yet	it	is	a	human	being	that	is	writing	to	you,	dearest.	(Having
been	 presumptuous	 enough	 to	 say	 this,	 he	 hardly	 knows	 how	 to
describe	 the	consequences	of	being	a	human	being;	 they	are	 far	and
away	beyond	him.)	He	strives	 toward	you	and	gathers	his	miserable
forces	for	that	purpose,	and	finds	the	distance	to	Berlin	by	no	means
so	hard	to	bear	as	the	height	separating	him	from	you.	And	in	spite	of
all	his	good	intentions	the	only	thing	he	will	achieve	will	be	“to	keep
on	disappointing	you	over	and	over	again,”	as	you	say	in	today’s	letter
(albeit	 in	another	connection,	but	 it	 comes	about	automatically,	and
unintentionally	on	your	part,	that	these	remarks	refer	to	me).	There	is
nothing	else	he	can	do,	for	we	have	no	powers	other	than	those	with
which	we	were	 turned	out	 into	 the	world,	 and	 even	when	our	 lives
are	at	stake	we	cannot	procure	new	ones	from	some	obscure	reserves.
Neither	in	the	office	nor	in	the	tram	could	you	write	to	me.	Shall	I
tell	 you	why,	 dearest?	 You	 didn’t	 know	whom	 to	write	 to.	 I	 am	no
target	for	letters.	If	I	would,	or	could,	appear	quite	calmly	before	you
to	 the	 full	extent	of	my	wretched	condition,	you	would	shrink	back.
Instead—of	 course	 without	 intention—I	 run	 around	 in	 circles	 like
those	mad	squirrels	 in	their	cages,	with	the	sole	purpose,	dearest,	of
keeping	you	there	in	front	of	my	cage,	and	to	know	you	are	near	me,
even	if	I	cannot	see	you.	How	long	will	it	take	you	to	see	through	it
all,	and	once	you	have	done	so,	how	long	will	you	stay?



Franz

Presumably	enclosed:
These	are	the	fantasies	or	the	wishes	I	indulge	in	when	lying	sleepless
in	bed:
To	be	a	large	piece	of	wood,	and	to	be	pressed	against	her	body	by
the	cook,	who	with	both	hands	draws	the	knife	toward	her	along	the
side	of	this	stiff	log	(approximately	in	the	region	of	my	hip)	and	with
all	her	might	slices	off	shavings	to	light	the	fire.

February	23,	1913
Only	a	few	words,	dearest,	for	I’m	late,	and	I	would	like	to	get	a	little
fresh	air	before	going	 to	see	Max.	As	seemed	fitting	(for	 I	 should	be
either	in	bed	or	in	Dresden),	I	spent	most	of	the	day	in	bed,	and	the
only	two,	though	terrible,	adventures	were	caused	by	my	father	who
gradually,	 and	 despite	 all	 resistance,	 dragged	 me	 firmly	 out	 of	 my
morning	 sleep	 back	 into	 this	 bleak	 world	 with	 his	 insane,
monotonous,	 incessant	 shouting,	 singing,	 and	 hand-clapping,	 which
he	repeated	over	and	over	again	with	renewed	force	to	amuse	a	great-
nephew,	 while	 in	 the	 afternoon	 he	 carried	 on	 in	 the	 same	 way	 to
entertain	 his	 grandson.	 Dearest	 one,	 it	 takes	 considerable	 virtue	 to
endure	 these	 goings-on	 without	 unfilial	 oaths,	 although	 it	 may	 be
understandable	(it’s	my	father’s	only	pleasure),	but	in	one’s	soul	quite
incomprehensible	 (to	 me	 tribal	 dances	 are	 less	 incomprehensible).
Imagine	 battering	 at	 someone	 like	 that!	 In	 the	 afternoon	 especially,
every	shout	was	like	a	punch	in	the	eye.	And	then	to	think	that	many
years	 ago	 I	 was	 being	 entertained	 in	 the	 same	 way.	 In	 those	 days,
however,	 there	was	 no	 one	 next	 door	 being	made	 to	 suffer	 from	 it.
And	yet	it	may	not	even	be	the	shouting	that	puts	such	a	strain	on	me;
altogether	it	requires	strength	to	tolerate	children	in	the	apartment.	I
can’t	do	it,	I	can’t	forget	myself,	my	blood	refuses	to	flow,	it	becomes
congealed,	 and	 this	 desire	 of	 the	 blood,	 after	 all,	 is	 supposed	 to
represent	 love	 for	 children.	 I	 am	wondering	whether	 to	 leave	 home
and	 take	 a	 room	 somewhere	 on	 account	 of	 my	 nephew’s	 and	 my
niece’s	occasional	presence;	after	all,	they	are	growing	up	and	getting
noisier	 and	 noisier.	 Once,	 years	 ago,	 though	 for	 different	 reasons,	 I
came	very	close	to	moving	out,	but	in	the	end	I	let	them	stop	me.
Where	are	you	today,	dearest?	I	seem	to	have	lost	sight	of	you.	Are



you	 staying	 on	 in	Dresden,	 or	 returning	 this	 evening?	 It	 has	 been	 a
lovely	 day	 and	 I	wandered	 around	Dresden	many	 times	 in	my	half-
sleep.	In	my	subsequent	awakening	I	began	adding	up	my	present	real
and	 imaginary	 ills	 (the	effect,	of	course,	 is	no	different	provided	 the
powers	of	imagination	are	strong	enough)	and	arrived	at	a	total	of	6,
which	would	be	reason	enough	for	sulking	and	head-hanging,	were	it
not	for	you,	dearest,	you	who	can	bear	this	accumulation	of	suffering,
for	which	the	reward	as	well	as	the	penalty	could	only	be	an	endless
shower	of	kisses.

Franz

From	February	23	to	24,	1913
First	of	all,	dearest,	so	as	not	to	keep	on	postponing	it	(perhaps	it	has
already	been	worrying	you),	I	am	returning	your	little	niece’s	picture.
Yes,	that	child	deserves	to	be	loved.	That	anxious	look,	as	though	all
the	horrors	of	the	world	were	on	view	there	in	the	studio!	And	yet	her
hands	are	resting	on	the	arm	of	the	chair	and	on	her	hip,	 just	 like	a
grande	 dame,	 proof	 of	 her	 unselfconsciousness.	 And	 I	 will	 even	 risk
contradicting	my	afternoon	letter	and	declare	that	I	love	little	Wilma
sitting	on	her	cushion.	 (But	of	course	who	can	say	whether	 it	 is	not
just	for	your	sake?)	Is	the	picture	in	your	locket	a	different	one?	And
could	I	see	that	one	as	well?
I	was	very	much	amused,	I	might	almost	say—don’t	get	me	wrong

—shaken,	by	your	sister’s	letter.	Not	because	she	subordinates	herself
entirely	to	her	child,	she	doesn’t	do	so	in	a	particularly	characteristic
fashion—but	 because	 in	 it	 a	 candid	 disposition	 displays	 itself	 in	 a
veritable	 flood,	 an	 inconceivable	 quantity	 of	 small,	 coherent,	 but
above	 all	 monotonous	 detail.	 The	 remarks	 about	 the	 brothers	 and
sisters—the	 enumeration	 of	 the	 presents—the	 enumeration	 of	 the
customs	 charges.	 Dearest,	 please	 don’t	 misunderstand	 me:	 when	 I
make	these	comments	it	has	nothing	whatever	to	do	with	the	regard,
even	respect,	I	naturally	feel	for	your	sister.	I	am	always	roused	when
seemingly	and	legitimately	there	is	nothing	to	enjoy.	I	am	thinking	of
the	evening	before	 last	when,	 fully	occupied	with	my	own	misery,	 I
saw	an	acquaintance,	 the	owner	or	 rather	 the	son	of	 the	owner	of	a
Jewish	 bookshop,	 stepping	 out	 of	 the	 front	 door	 of	 a	 house	 just	 in
front	of	me.	He	must	be	40	years	old	by	now;	once,	years	ago,	he	was
engaged	 to	 a	 big	 hefty	 girl;	 then	 the	 engagement	 was	 broken	 off



because	he	didn’t	get	enough	money.	Later,	but	also	many	years	ago,
he	married	a	delicate,	very	lively	woman.	I	remember	them	coming	to
see	 us	 in	 our	 old	 apartment,	 and	 the	 way	 this	 woman	 talked	 in	 a
strange,	disjointed	fashion.	It	seems	to	me	now	almost	as	though	she
used	to	wear	a	train,	even	in	broad	daylight,	which	she	kept	kicking
to	one	side	with	her	foot.	A	few	weeks	later	this	woman	went	mad—
they	say	the	husband,	or	rather	the	husband’s	parents,	were	largely	to
blame—was	 sent	 to	 an	asylum,	 the	marriage	was	dissolved,	 and	 the
husband,	despite	his	resistance,	had	to	return	the	greater	part	of	 the
dowry	 (much	 to	 my	 father’s	 satisfaction,	 since	 he	 followed	 this
particular	family’s	affairs	with	interest,	though	not	without	malicious
pleasure).	Thus	the	man	was	free	again,	but	did	not	remarry,	probably
because	 his	 parents,	 to	 whom	 he	 was	 infinitely	 devoted,	 no	 longer
demanded	 it.	 He	 was	 never	 independent,	 but	 ever	 since	 leaving
school,	 that	 is,	 for	 a	 small	 eternity,	 he	 has	 been	 sitting	 in	 this	 tiny
shop	where	there	is	hardly	enough	work	for	one	person,	and	with	the
help	of	an	assistant	he	dusts	 the	prayer	shawls	on	display;	when	the
weather	is	warm	he	stands	in	the	open	doorway	(he	used	to	take	turns
with	his	parents,	 but	now	 they	are	 frequently	 ill),	when	 it’s	 cold	he
stands	behind	the	book-covered	door,	and	through	the	gaps	between
the	books,	mostly	obscene,	he	gazes	out	into	the	street.	He	considers
himself	 a	 German,	 is	 a	member	 of	 the	 local	 German	 Casino	which,
though	 open	 to	 all,	 is	 considered	 among	 local	 Germans	 the	 most
exclusive	club,	and	probably	every	evening	when	the	shop	is	shut	and
he	has	had	dinner,	he	goes	to	the	Deutsche	Haus.	And	this	is	what	he
was	doing	the	night	before	last	when	I	happened	to	catch	sight	of	him
as	he	was	 leaving	his	house.	He	walked	along	ahead	of	me	 just	as	 I
remember	him	as	a	young	man.	His	back	is	remarkably	broad,	and	his
walk	 so	peculiar	 and	 stiff	 that	one	 cannot	 tell	whether	he	 is	merely
stiff	or	actually	deformed;	in	any	case,	he	is	very	bony	and	his	lower
jaw,	 for	 instance,	 is	 enormous.	Well,	 can	 you	 imagine,	 dearest,	 can
you	 actually	 imagine	 (tell	 me!)	 what	 made	 me	 follow	 this	 man
greedily	along	Zeltnergasse,	turn	off	behind	him	into	the	Graben,	and
with	 infinite	 pleasure	watch	 him	 disappear	 through	 the	 door	 of	 the
Deutsche	Haus?
It’s	late,	you	use	a	phrase,	Felice,	for	which	you	have	no	need;	give
it	to	me,	and	let	me	say:	“Go	on	loving	me!”

Franz



From	February	24	to	25,	1913
Your	 sister?	And	 I,	 always	 stubbornly	 caught	up	 in	my	own	misery,
had	no	idea,	and	in	the	letter	I	sent	to	Dresden	I	wished	you,	my	poor
heart,	“peaceful	hours”	there.	Had	I	known	then	approximately	what	I
know	 now	 of	 the	 purpose	 of	 your	 journey	 to	 Dresden,	 I	 probably
would	have	come	to	Dresden	despite	my	condition,	for	even	in	all	my
apathy	 I	could	hardly	have	 tolerated	 the	 thought	of	you	being	 there
alone	and	unhappy.	It	did	just	strike	me	the	other	day	that	your	sister
was	about	to	leave	her	good	job	in	Dresden,	and	that	you	were	trying
to	find	her	a	similar,	very	special	position	with	some	professors,	etc.,
in	Berlin—but	I	dismissed	it.	I	don’t	even	want	to	know	what	it	is	all
about,	dearest,	 if	 it	 is	difficult	 for	you	to	 tell	me,	unless	 there	 is	 the
remotest	 possibility	 that	 I	 might	 be	 able	 to	 offer	 advice	 or	 help	 (it
would	 be	 for	 you,	 after	 all,	 and	 that	 would	 give	 me	 strength	 and
ingenuity)—but	what	I	must	know	soon,	dearest—soon	I	say!—is	how
you	are.	Owing	to	me,	quite	enough	has	happened	to	upset	you	during
this	 autumn	 and	winter.	And	 I	 cannot	 possibly	 take	 it	 to	 be	 a	 good
sign	 that	 I	 have	 no	 news	 as	 yet	 about	 the	 success	 of	 your	 trip	 to
Dresden,	 nor	 of	 the	 state	 you	 were	 in	 on	 your	 return	 journey.	 I
definitely	 ought	 to	 have	 gone	 to	 Dresden;	 you	might	 after	 all	 have
found	me	 useful	 in	 some	way,	 and	 the	 sight	 of	 your	 distress	would
have	made	me	capable	of	many	things.
I	hardly	dare	go	on	writing,	 for	 I	don’t	 really	know	what	you	are
doing.	 If	 on	 Saturday	 and	 Sunday	 evening,	 thus	 at	 a	 time	when	 all
your	thoughts	were	engaged	on	this	 journey,	I	could	sit	with	Max	in
his	 new	 apartment,	 not	 essentially	 more	 miserable	 than	 usual,	 as
though	you	were	on	some	other	planet	and	the	ground	under	my	feet
were	 in	 no	 way	 connected	 to	 that	 upon	 which	 you	 were	 obviously
wandering	about	in	a	state	of	great	agitation—who	knows	how	things
are	 for	you	at	 this	moment,	while	 I	coldly	put	down	one	word	after
another?	Dearest,	it’s	a	miserable	life,	and	only	he	who	knows	how	to
intervene	with	a	whip	can	grasp	it	fully.
I	don’t	want	to	warn	you,	dearest,	against	exposing	yourself	to	such
excitements,	 even	 if	 they	 should	be	unnecessary—how	could	 I	warn
you	against	following	your	heart,	since	I	would	know	no	better	than
to	do	the	same,	but	now	back	in	Berlin—be	less	considerate	and	take
care	 of	 yourself.	 Let	 everything	 slide	 for	 a	 while,	 your	 mother’s
meetings,	your	sister’s	dances,	your	needlework,	your	aunt,	and	sleep,
sleep!	 Only	 in	 sleep	 is	 one	 among	 benevolent	 spirits;	 too	 much



wakefulness	plagues	you	to	death.
Franz

From	Febuary	25	to	26,	1913
Now,	dearest,	 I	am	really	helpless.	 I	 can	 see	 that	you	are	miserable,
and	 I	 don’t	 know	 what	 is	 happening;	 you	 are	 weeping	 again,	 and
there	 isn’t	 a	word	 I	 can	 say;	you	 say	you	need	advice,	 and	 I	 cannot
give	 you	 any.	 That	 you	 too	 should	 now	 be	 drawn	 into	 some
unhappiness	 unknown	 to	 me	 is	 truly	 in	 accord	 with	 the	 advances
unhappiness	has	recently	made	all	around	me.	Dearest,	I	do	wish	we
could	 be	 gone	 from	 here	 together.	 Why	 should	 we	 tolerate	 having
been	thrown	upon	this	black	prickly	earth	from	some	kind	of	heaven?
Even	as	a	child	I	used	to	stand	in	great	admiration	in	front	of	a	picture
dealer’s	window,	looking	at	a	bad	color	print	depicting	the	suicide	of
two	 lovers.	 A	 winter’s	 night,	 with	 the	 moon	 visible	 between	 great
clouds	 just	 for	 this	 last	 moment.	 The	 couple	 stood	 at	 the	 end	 of	 a
small	wooden	landing-stage,	about	to	take	the	decisive	step.	Together
both	the	girl’s	foot,	and	the	man’s,	strained	toward	the	deep,	and	with
a	sigh	of	relief	one	felt	they	were	within	the	grip	of	gravity.	The	only
other	 thing	 I	 recall	 is	 that	 the	 girl	 had	 a	 fine,	 pale	 green,	 loosely
fluttering	veil	wound	around	her	bare	head,	while	the	man’s	dark	coat
was	 taut	 in	 the	wind.	Their	arms	were	around	each	other,	and	 their
advance	 was	 so	 smooth	 and	 urgent	 that	 one	 couldn’t	 say	 that	 she
drew	him,	or	 that	he	pushed	her,	and	one	may	have	sensed	vaguely
even	then,	 though	one	didn’t	 realize	 it	 fully	until	 later,	 that	 for	 love
there	may	 be	 no	way	 out	 other	 than	 that	 depicted	 there.	 But	 being
still	 a	 child	 at	 the	 time,	 I	 undoubtedly	 derived	 even	 greater
amusement	 from	 the	picture	 that	usually	hung	next	 to	 this	one,	and
which	 showed	a	wild	boar	emerging	 from	 the	depth	of	 the	 forest	 in
one	 great	 leap	 to	 disrupt	 a	 hunt-breakfast	 in	 a	 clearing,	 forcing	 the
hunters	 to	 hide	 behind	 trees,	 scattering	 plates	 and	 food	 in	 all
directions.
What	can	I	do,	dearest,	but	wait	 for	you	to	calm	down	again.	Has
your	 father	 gone	 away	 again?	 It	 seems	 to	 me	 that	 you	 could	 have
discussed	any	kind	of	incident	with	him;	his	sympathetic	interest	may
not	be	as	great	as	your	mother’s,	but	this	should	make	it	all	the	easier
to	 get	 advice,	 or,	 failing	 that,	 gain	 reassurance	 from	 him.	 But	 of
course	 he	 must	 be	 at	 home,	 since	 you	 say	 you	 have	 to	 lie	 to	 your



parents.	Might	 another	 journey	 to	 Dresden	 be	 necessary,	 one	 that	 I
could	 manage	 as	 well	 as	 you,	 and	 that	 I	 would	 undertake	 with
pleasure,	 since	 I	 assume	 it	would	 be	more	 difficult	 for	 you	 to	 leave
home	a	 second	 time?	But	 I	may	be	 stirring	up	your	grief	with	 these
questions	more	than	I	am	assuaging	it.	But	there	is	nothing	else	I	can
do;	I	have	gradually	lost	sight	of	all	other	human	beings,	can	see	only
you,	and	you	are	so	distressed.

Franz

From	February	26	to	27,	1913
Are	 your	 worries	 really	 over	 now?	 It	 seems	 so,	 according	 to	 your
morning	 letter,	 or	 is	 it	 only	 self-control	 for	my	 sake?	 For	 a	while	 I
kept	turning	the	telegram	around	in	my	hand,	unopened.	What	could
be	in	it?	No	matter	how	aware	I	am	of	your	kindness,	and	no	matter
how	much	I	exploit	that	kindness	(my	entire	present-day	existence	has
no	other	purpose	or	pastime)—it	had	never	occurred	to	me	that	with
your	telegram	you	might	wish	to	remove	every	possible	anxiety.	For	a
moment	I	thought	it	might	say:	“Hurry	to	the	station.	Am	arriving	in
15	minutes.”	I	admit	a	telegram	of	that	kind	would	have	given	me	a
frightful	shock.	I	would	actually	have	felt	(even	experienced	it	for	one
moment)	nothing	but	 shock—like	 suddenly	being	 torn	out	of	 a	 long
night’s	 sleep.	 Well,	 it	 would	 probably	 have	 roused	 me	 out	 of	 my
lethargy,	 this	 dreadful	 lethargy	 that	 turns	 the	 entire	 apartment,	 in
fact,	 the	 entire	 city,	 into	 one	 big	 bed	 for	 me.	 But	 the	 telegram
contained	 nothing	 of	 the	 kind;	 I	 am	 alone	 as	 before,	 except	 that
sometimes	 I	 can	 virtually	 see	my	 face	 staring	 back	 at	me	 from	 the
paper	I	am	writing	on,	so	that	I	almost	feel	like	laying	down	my	pen
to	prevent	myself	from	clinging	to	you	continually,	from	bending	you
down,	you	who	stand	straight,	and	instead	abandoning	myself	to	the
current	I	seem	to	feel	moving	slowly	beneath	me.
My	second	thought	about	the	telegram,	however,	was	precisely	the
opposite:	 “Then	 I	 probably	won’t	 get	 a	 letter	 tomorrow,”	 and	 I	 still
haven’t	quite	recovered	from	this	fright.
Dearest,	haven’t	you	slightly	misunderstood	what	I	said	about	your
sister?	On	the	contrary,	she	actually	strikes	me	as	full	of	character,	but
her	 love	 for	 the	 child	 is	 somewhat	 monotonous,	 and	 makes	 one
suspect	she	may	not	be	very	good	at	bringing	it	up.	Nor	could	I	make
out	why	in	this	 letter—which	followed	the	previous	one	after	a	 long



interval—the	husband,	your	brother-in-law,	wasn’t	mentioned	at	all.
Today’s	letter,	dearest,	was	the	second	to	be	broken	off.	Don’t	forget
the	 next	 installments!	 The	 first	 broke	 off	 at	 an	 incident	 that	 was
evidently	 surprising,	 and	greatly	 influenced	your	drawing	when	you
were	 in	 3rd	 grade;	 and	 this	 letter	 breaks	 off	 in	 Silesia,	 when	 your
father	was	doing	your	sister’s	homework.
I	should	also	like	to	have	your	opinion	and	explanation,	dearest,	of
the	pleasure	I	derived	from	that	bookseller’s	son.	With	every	answer	to
any	question	of	this	kind	I	feel	myself	entering	more	deeply	into	you,
obtain	a	further	sanction	to	live	in	you,	and	for	a	moment	exchange	a
life	of	pretense	for	one	of	burning	reality.

Franz

February	27	to	28,	1913
I	was	put	to	shame	this	evening.	I	went	for	a	walk	with	Weltsch	(his
book	 [Intuition	 and	 Concept]	 has	 already	 appeared.	 Would	 you	 be
interested	in	it?	I	don’t	think	so:	it	is	strictly	philosophical.	I	have	to
force	myself	to	read	and	understand	it;	my	attention	strays	too	easily
when	there	is	nothing	there	to	put	one’s	finger	on)—well,	I	went	for	a
walk	with	 him	 and	 imperceptibly	 he	 began—it	 didn’t	 last	 long	 and
was	probably	only	a	momentary	mood—talking	about	and	against	my
gloom.	 What	 put	 me	 to	 shame	 was	 not	 that	 he	 actually	 made	 the
attempt	 to	 rebuke	me.	 Indeed,	 this	 is	 something	 I	 like	 hearing;	 it	 is
pleasant	 to	 allow	 these	 things	 to	 go	 through	 one’s	 empty	 head;
moreover,	what	 he	 said	 today	was	 extremely	wise.	What	 put	me	 to
shame	 was	 rather	 that	 he	 thought	 this	 rebuke	 necessary,	 though	 I
hadn’t	 directly	 invited	 it	with	 any	 single	 remark	 and	 though	 at	 this
particular	moment	he	is	wholly	preoccupied	with	his	own	affairs.	But
what	 shamed	 me	 most	 was	 that	 he	 tried—whether	 consciously	 or
unconsciously	is	neither	here	nor	there,	for	after	all	I	am	talking	of	my
shame—not	 to	 let	me	 see	 he	was	 rebuking	me;	 he	 spoke	 in	 general
terms	 with	 a	 reasoning	 far	 too	 hasty,	 in	 my	 opinion,	 and
counterreasoning	 far	 too	 brief,	 which	 he	 is	 so	 fond	 of	 and	 which
comes	to	him	so	naturally.
What’s	the	good	of	feeling	ashamed!	After	I	had	seen	him	home	(it
was	 foggy,	 and	 this	 frightens	 him),	 I	 thought	 of	 going	 to	 the
coffeehouse	 (I	might	 have	met	Werfel	 and	 others	 there),	 but	 then	 I
dreaded	that	too,	and	after	some	wavering	I	decided	to	go	home.	Then



I	met	an	acquaintance,	 a	Zionist	 student	who	 is	very	 sensible,	keen,
active,	amiable,	but	at	the	same	time	possesses	a	degree	of	composure
I	find	altogether	disturbing.	He	stops	me,	invites	me	to	an	especially
important	evening	meeting	(how	many	similar	invitations	has	he	not
wasted	 on	 me	 in	 the	 course	 of	 the	 years!);	 at	 that	 moment	 my
indifference	 to	 him	 as	 a	 person,	 or	 to	 any	 form	 of	 Zionism,	 was
immense	and	inexpressible,	but—and	you	must	believe	me,	dearest—I
could	not	find	a	socially	possible	way	of	saying	goodbye,	although	a
silent	handshake	would	have	been	quite	enough,	and	for	 this	 reason
alone	I	offered	to	accompany	him,	and	in	fact	accompanied	him	as	far
as	 the	door	of	 the	very	coffeehouse	 I	had	meant	 to	go	 to	earlier	on.
But	 I	 would	 not	 allow	 myself	 to	 be	 dragged	 inside;	 instead,
surprisingly,	nicely	and	easily,	I	found	that	liberating	handshake.
It’s	 late	 now,	 and	 I	 have	 told	 you	 practically	 nothing	 about	 this
evening,	 though	 I	would	 have	 had	 quite	 a	 lot	 to	 tell	 you	 about	my
being	alone.

Franz

From	[February]	28	to	March	1	[1913]
Late,	dearest,	 late.	 I	did	some	work	 for	 the	office	and	that	made	me
late.	And	 I	 feel	 cold	as	well.	Have	 I	 caught	a	chill	again?	 It’s	 rather
annoying;	I	feel	a	continuous	cold	draft	down	my	left	side.
Really,	how	can	you	say	that	I	could	be	angry	with	you	if	for	once	I
don’t	get	a	 letter?	Understand,	and	impress	upon	your	mind	the	fact
that	 I	must	be	grateful	 to	you	 for	 everything	you	give	me,	 and	 that
one	kind	word	 is	worth	more	 to	me,	as	 it	 is	 in	 the	eyes	of	a	higher
judge,	than	the	whole	pile	of	my	letters.	So,	with	your	life	being	such
a	rush,	don’t	force	yourself	to	write,	let	a	day	pass	without	writing	if	it
could	rob	you	even	of	a	little	of	the	sleep	you	so	badly	need;	and	rest
assured	 that	 I	 shall	 wait	 steadfastly	 for	 your	 next	 letter,	 however
many	 days	 you	may	 have	missed.	 In	 this	 I	 am	 steadfast,	 no	matter
how	much	everything	else	around	me	may	flutter	and	change.
This	evening,	and	also	during	the	day,	I	was	calmer	and	more	self-
assured	than	usual;	now	it	has	all	gone	again.	I	must	say	I	should	like
to	meet	the	man	who,	without	injury	to	himself,	could	stand	my	way
of	life,	above	all	my	lonely	evening	walks.	At	home	I	speak	to	hardly
anyone;	the	relationship	with	my	sister,	based	mainly	on	my	writing,
is	also	wearing	very	thin.	Our	lives,	yours	and	mine,	are	now	precise



opposites;	 you	 are	 constantly	 surrounded	 by	 people,	 I	 rarely	 see	 a
soul;	the	people	at	the	office	hardly	count,	least	of	all	now	that	I	have
been	sleeping	better	for	several	days	and	find	my	work	less	irksome.	It
is	as	irrelevant	as	I	am;	we	suit	each	other.	Very	soon	I	shall	even	be
made	vice-secretary;	it	serves	me	right.58
The	 other	 day	 I	 was	 walking	 along	 Eisengasse	 when	 beside	 me
someone	said:	“What	is	Karl	doing?”	I	turn;	I	see	a	man	who,	without
taking	any	notice	of	me,	walks	along	talking	to	himself,	and	had	also
asked	 himself	 this	 question.	 But	 it	 so	 happens	 that	 the	 principal
character	in	my	ill-fated	novel	is	called	Karl,	and	it	was	this	harmless
passerby’s	 function	 to	 jeer	 at	 me,	 for	 I	 can	 hardly	 consider	 it	 an
encouragement.
The	other	 day	 in	 connection	with	my	uncle’s	 letter	 you	 asked	me
about	my	 plans	 and	 prospects.	 I	was	 amazed	 by	 your	 question,	 and
am	now	reminded	of	it	again	by	this	stranger’s	question.	Needless	to
say	I	have	no	plans,	no	prospects;	I	cannot	step	into	the	future;	I	can
crash	 into	 the	 future,	 grind	 into	 the	 future,	 stumble	 into	 the	 future,
this	 I	 can	 do;	 but	 best	 of	 all	 I	 can	 lie	 still.	 Plans	 and	 prospects,
however—honestly,	 I	have	none;	when	 things	go	well,	 I	 am	entirely
absorbed	 by	 the	 present;	 when	 things	 go	 badly,	 I	 curse	 even	 the
present,	let	alone	the	future!

Franz

Saturday	[March	1,	1913]	2	o’clock	[A.M.]
Just	a	few	words,	dearest.	A	pleasant	evening	at	Max’s.	I	read	myself
into	a	frenzy	with	my	story.59	But	 then	we	did	 let	ourselves	go,	and
laughed	a	lot.	If	one	bolts	the	doors	and	windows	against	the	world,
one	 can	 from	 time	 to	 time	 create	 the	 semblance	 and	 almost	 the
beginning	 of	 the	 reality	 of	 a	 beautiful	 life.	 I	 started	 a	 little	 story60
yesterday,	it	is	still	so	little	its	head	has	hardly	begun	to	show,	as	yet
one	 cannot	 tell;	 all	 the	 more	 wicked	 that	 contrary	 to	 every	 good
resolution	 I	 abandoned	 it	 today,	 and	went	 to	 see	Max.	 If	 it’s	worth
anything	it	could	perhaps	wait	until	tomorrow.

March	2,	1913
Sunday	 afternoon.	 I	 am	 quite	 distracted.	 At	 Baum’s,	 who	 has	 just
returned	 from	 Berlin	 where	 he	 spent	 a	 few	 days	 on	 publishing



business,	 I	heard	such	an	extraordinary	assortment	of	news,	and	this
in	spite	of	having,	very	rudely,	 to	silence	Frau	Baum,	of	whom	I	am
very	fond,	and	put	her	out	of	the	room—since,	still	drunk	with	Oskar’s
success	in	Berlin,	she	kept	on	interrupting.	On	arriving	there,	I	had	a
headache	 and	 am	 now	 sitting	 here	 with	 a	 headache.	 By	 the	 way,
Oskar	 is	 reading	 in	 the	 Klindworthsaal	 on	April	 1st;	 shall	 I	 go	with
him	to	Berlin?
My	headache	started	in	the	night.	During	the	evening	I	was	unable
to	control	my	agitation;	it	tore	at	me	again	and	again,	I	could	not	get
to	 sleep,	 just	 kept	 tossing	 and	 turning.	 My	 ordinary	 common	 sense
told	 me	 to	 get	 up,	 make	 use	 of	 the	 night’s	 silence,	 and	 write.
Something	prevented	me	from	doing	so.
The	promised	letter	has	not	arrived,	dearest.	Don’t	promise,	dearest,
don’t	promise,	if	it’s	not	going	to	arrive.	I	am	satisfied	with	anything,
one	 word	 that	 comes	 from	 your	 heart	 is	 enough	 for	 me,	 but	 don’t
promise	something,	dearest,	that	doesn’t	arrive.
I	 still	haven’t	 received	your	sister’s61	address,	and	 it	 really	 is	high
time.	The	parcel	may	not	get	there	in	time;	you	will	put	the	blame	on
me,	lose	confidence	in	me,	and	it	gives	me	such	pleasure	to	be	asked
to	do	that	kind	of	job.	I	am	proud	of	it.	Remember	to	send	me	a	little
note	 to	enclose	as	well,	otherwise	 I	won’t	know	how	to	 inform	your
sister	that	you	are	the	donor,	unless	you	were	to	notify	her	direct.—I
am	writing	 briefly	 and	 in	 haste	 because	 I	 am	 in	my	 ice-cold	 room.
Farewell,	dearest,	and	continue	to	stay	by	me.

Franz

From	March	2	to	3,	1913
My	sisters	and	their	husbands	have	gone;	it	is	already	10:30;	but	my
father	 has	 sat	 down	 again	 and	 ordered	 my	 mother	 to	 play	 cards.
Owing	 to	my	 recent	 cold-catching	 tendencies,	 I	 am	obliged	 to	 share
the	 living	 room,	and	 so	am	writing	 to	 the	 sounds	of	 the	card	game.
My	mother	is	sitting	opposite	me,	my	father	at	the	head	of	the	table,
on	 my	 right.	 Just	 now,	 as	 my	 father	 rose	 to	 put	 a	 bottle	 of	 water
outside	 the	 balcony	door,	 I	whispered	 to	my	mother	without	 taking
my	pen	from	the	paper:	“Do	go	to	bed!”	No	doubt	she	would	like	to,
but	it	is	difficult.
“Double	 the	 last	 two!”	 exclaims	 my	 father,	 which	 means	 that	 at
least	 two	more	games	will	 have	 to	be	played,	 and	 this	 could	 take	 a



very	long	time.
Earlier	 this	 evening	 I	 again	 went	 for	 a	 walk	 with	 my	 sister,	 and
while	talking	of	other	things,	in	a	moment	of	loneliness,	which	often
comes	over	me,	especially	 in	company	(something	not	uncommon	to
others,	 of	 course),	 this	 thought	 passed	 through	 my	 mind:	 do	 you,
dearest	 (it	 is	always	dearest,	 for	 I	have	and	 shall	have	no	one	else),
still	 care	 for	me	as	much	as	you	used	 to?	 It	 is	not	 so	much	 in	your
letters	 that	 I	 sense	a	change	 in	your	opinion	of	me;	on	the	contrary,
not	in	your	letters	at	all.
(It	 is	past	1	o’clock.	 In	 the	meantime,	dearest,	 I	have	been	almost
entirely	thrown	by	my	story	[the	“Liman”	fragment]—today	was	the
verdict,	 and	 it	 was	 found	 against	 me—and	 now,	 if	 you	 want	 me,	 I
literally	 come	 crawling	 back	 to	 you.)	 I	 deduce	 this	 change	 in	 your
opinion	of	me	mainly	 from	my	own	recent	behavior,	and	tell	myself
that	 it	 is	 impossible	 for	 you	 to	 retain	 your	 former	 attitude.	 Lately	 I
have	 been	 in	 the	 grip	 of	 something	 that	 is	 not	 exceptional,	 I	 have
known	it	for	15	years;	with	the	help	of	my	writing	I	managed	to	get
out	of	it	for	some	time,	and	in	my	ignorance	of	how	alarmingly	short-
lived	this	“getting	out	of	it”	was,	I	had	the	courage	to	turn	to	you,	and
proud	 of	 my	 apparent	 rebirth	 I	 believed	 I	 could	 accept	 the	 entire
responsibility	for	my	attempt	at	drawing	you,	the	most	precious	thing
I	had	ever	come	across	in	my	life,	over	to	me.	But	in	what	light	have	I
shown	myself	 to	 you	 these	 past	weeks?	How	 can	 you,	 if	 you	 are	 in
your	 right	mind,	 continue	 to	 stay	with	me?	 I	have	no	doubt	 that	 in
ordinary	 circumstances	 you	 would	 have	 the	 courage	 to	 give	 your
truthful	 opinion,	 even	 if	 no	 more	 than	 a	 glimmer	 of	 a	 change	 had
taken	 place.	 But	 your	 candor,	 dearest,	 is	 no	 greater	 than	 your
kindness.	And	what	I	fear	is	that	even	if	I	were	to	become	abhorrent
to	you—after	all,	you	are	a	girl,	and	want	a	man,	not	a	flabby	worm
on	 the	 earth—even	 if	 I	 were	 to	 become	 abhorrent,	 your	 kindness
would	not	fail	you.	You	realize	how	completely	I	belong	to	you—but
does	 one	 abruptly	 throw	 away	 a	 thing	 that	 belongs	 to	 one	 so
completely,	even	 if	 reasonable	consideration	 for	oneself	demands	 it?
And	you	of	 all	 people—would	 you	do	 it?	Could	 you	overcome	your
compassion?	You	who	are	so	deeply	affected	by	the	unhappiness	of	all
those	around	you?	On	the	other	hand,	there	is	me.	I	will	not	deny	that
I	could	very	easily	feed	on	someone	else’s	compassion,	but	I	certainly
could	 not	 enjoy	 the	 fruits	 of	 any	 kind	 of	 compassion	 that	 would
inevitably	 destroy	 you.	 Remember	 that,	 dearest,	 remember	 that!	 I
could	 endure	 anything	 more	 easily	 than	 that.	 Anything	 you	 say,



prompted	 by	 whatever	 sentiment—more	 easily	 than	 that	 kind	 of
compassion.	 Your	 compassion,	 intended	 for	 my	 good,	 would	 in	 its
effect	 ultimately	 have	 to	 turn	 against	 me.	 You	 are	 far	 away,	 and	 I
cannot	 see	 you—nevertheless	 I	 would	 know	 if	 you	 were	 destroying
yourself	 with	 compassion.	 And	 for	 this	 reason,	 dearest,	 answer	 the
following	question	today—when	it	certainly	hasn’t	quite	reached	that
point—without	evasions,	and	 for	my	reassurance:	Should	you	at	any
time	 realize,	 clearly	 enough	 to	 exclude	 at	 least	most	 of	 the	 doubts,
that	 I	 am,	 though	 perhaps	with	 some	 difficulty,	 dispensable	 to	 you;
should	you	realize	 that	 I	am	a	hindrance	 to	your	 ideas	of	 the	 future
(why	is	it	that	I	hear	nothing	about	them?);	should	you	realize	that	you
—a	 kind,	 active,	 lively,	 self-assured	 person—have	 nothing,	 save
something	 harmful	 to	 yourself,	 in	 common	 with	 the	 confusion	 or
rather	 the	 monotonous	 blur	 of	 my	 personality,	 would	 you	 then,
dearest	 (please	 don’t	 answer	 this	 lightly,	 be	 aware	 of	 the
responsibility	 of	 your	 reply!),	 would	 you,	 heedless	 of	 your
compassion,	 be	 able	 to	 tell	 me	 so	 truthfully?	 I	 repeat:	 this	 is	 a
question	 of	 kindness,	 not	 love	 of	 truth!	 And	 an	 answer	 limited	 to
denying	 the	 possibility	 of	 the	 supposition	 contained	 in	my	 question
would	not	be	an	answer	 that	 could	 satisfy	 either	me,	or	my	anxiety
about	you.	Or	rather,	it	would	be	an	adequate	answer;	that	is	to	say,
an	admission	of	invincible	compassion.—But	why	do	I	ask	at	all,	and
torment	you!	After	all,	I	know	the	answer.
Dearest,	goodnight.	I	will	leave	this	letter	and	go	to	bed,	not	exactly
from	exhaustion,	rather	from	indecision	and	hopelessness.

Franz

From	March	3	to	4,	1913
Today,	 dearest,	 there	was	 no	 letter	 from	 you.	 It	 is	 easily	 explained;
yesterday	 your	 sister	 was	 in	 Berlin,	 there	 was	 no	 time,	 but	 I	 still
haven’t	got	the	address	in	Budapest,	and	if	it	doesn’t	come	tomorrow
the	birthday	may	be	over.
I	 have	 a	 lot	 to	 tell	 you,	 for	 my	 entire	 existence	 is	 no	more	 than
something	I	would	like,	if	possible,	to	commit	to	your	care—and	yet	I
have	been	sitting	here	quietly	for	some	little	time	with	my	pen	in	the
air;	after	all,	yesterday’s	letter	was	a	question	that	has	to	be	answered,
and	 since	 I	had	no	news	 today,	 it	 seems	 to	me,	however	absurd	 the
idea,	 that	 the	 letter	 I	wrote	 yesterday,	which	won’t	 even	 reach	 you



until	tomorrow,	has	also	remained	unanswered.	I	have	the	feeling	of
being	 outside	 a	 locked	 door	 behind	which	 you	 live,	 and	which	will
never	 be	 opened.	 Knocking	 is	 the	 only	 way	 of	 communicating,	 and
now	all	is	silent	behind	the	door.	But	there	is	one	thing	I	can	do	(how
nervous	I	am!	There	is	very	little	ink	in	my	inkpot,	so	it	is	propped	up
on	a	matchbox,	and	 just	now	as	 I	quickly	dipped	my	pen,	 it	 slid	off
the	 box—I	 twitched	 from	 head	 to	 foot,	 and	 both	 my	 hands	 shot
upward,	as	though	I	were	begging	for	mercy),	there	is	one	thing	I	can
do,	 which	 is	 to	 wait,	 though	 my	 parenthetical	 nervousness	 alone
appears	 to	 contradict	 this.	 For	 me	 impatience	 is	 only	 one	 way	 of
passing	 the	 time	while	waiting;	 the	 strength	 required	 for	waiting	 is
not	 weakened	 by	 it,	 though	 of	 course	 it	 is	 not	 strength	 at	 all,	 but
weakness,	 and	 the	 relaxing—at	 the	 slightest	 suggestion—of	 those
feeble	 powers	 that	 had	 been	 active.	 This	 characteristic	 of	 mine,
dearest,	exposes	you	to	the	greatest	dangers—this	I	add	as	a	postscript
to	yesterday’s	letter.	Because	I	for	my	part	would	never	leave	you,	not
even	 if	 it	 were	my	 lot—worse	 things	 could	 happen	 to	me—to	 have
with	 you	 an	 inner	 relationship	 that	 corresponded	 to	 an	 outer
circumstance	 such	 as	 having	 nothing	 to	 do	 but	wait	 forever	 outside
the	side	entrance	to	your	house,	while	you	passed	in	and	out	through
the	 front	 door.	 When	 judging	 me,	 don’t	 let	 this	 mislead	 you,	 and
however	low	I	may	bend	over	your	hand,	speak	your	true	mind	over
and	above	my	head!	Anyway,	nothing	you	say	will	surprise	me.	I	am
now	a	different	person	to	the	one	I	was	during	the	first	2	months	of
our	correspondence;	it	is	not	a	transformation	into	a	new	state,	rather
a	 relapse	 into	an	old	and	no	doubt	 lasting	one.	 If	you	 felt	drawn	 to
that	 person,	 you	 must,	 you	 must	 inevitably	 abhor	 this	 one.	 If	 you
conceal	 this	 fact,	 you	do	 so	 out	 of	 compassion	 and	 from	misleading
recollections.	The	fact	that	this	different	person—so	greatly	altered	in
every	way—continues	 to	 cling	 to	 you,	 if	 anything	more	 tenaciously
than	before,	cannot	fail,	if	you	will	admit	it	to	yourself,	to	make	him
even	more	abhorrent	to	you.

Franz

From	March	4	to	5,	1913
You	have	had	to	put	up	with	a	great	deal	recently,	dearest,	and	you
put	 up	with	 it	 in	 a	way	 that	 is	 incomprehensible	 to	me	 on	 the	 one
hand,	and	 that	 I	unhesitatingly	expect	of	you	on	 the	other.	Whether



you	 complain,	 are	weary,	 or	 even	 cry	 in	 your	 letters,	 I	 can	 see	 you
behind	 them,	 so	 vigorous	 and	 lively	 that	 shame	 about	 myself	 and
sadness	over	the	contrast—I	here,	you	there—make	me	want	to	creep
into	a	corner.	The	trouble	is,	I	am	not	at	peace	with	myself;	I	am	not
always	“something,”	and	if	for	once	I	am	“something,”	I	pay	for	it	by
“being	 nothing”	 for	months	 on	 end.	 And	 of	 course	 if	 I	 don’t	 collect
myself	 in	 time,	my	 judgment	 of	 people	 and	 of	 the	world	 in	 general
suffers	 from	it,	 too;	my	view	of	 the	hopelessness	of	 the	world	 is	due
largely	 to	 this	 distorted	 judgment	 which	 could	 no	 doubt	 be
straightened	 out	 automatically	 by	 reflecting,	 but	 only	 for	 a	 single
useless	moment.	As	illustration,	let	me	take	a	random	example:	In	the
foyer	of	a	cinematographic	theater	I	visited	this	evening	with	Max,	his
wife,	and	Weltsch	(which	reminds	me	that	it	is	now	nearly	2	o’clock),
there	are	a	number	of	photographs	from	the	film	The	Other	One.62	You
must	have	read	about	it,	Bassermann	is	in	it,	and	it	will	be	shown	here
next	week.	The	sight	of	B.	on	a	poster,	alone	and	in	an	armchair,	had
the	same	stirring	effect	upon	me	as	it	had	that	time	in	Berlin,63	and	to
their	general	disgust	I	kept	dragging	anyone	I	could	get	hold	of—Max,
his	wife,	or	Weltsch—back	to	that	poster.	Faced	by	the	photographs,
my	pleasure	diminished	at	once,	for	one	can	see	it	is	a	wretched	film;
the	 situations	 featured	were	 simply	 old-fashioned	 cinematic	 devices,
and,	 after	 all,	 a	 snapshot	 of	 a	 horse	 in	 action	 is	 almost	 invariably
beautiful,	 whereas	 a	 snapshot	 of	 a	 criminal	 expression	 on	 a	 human
face,	 even	 Bassermann’s,	 could	well	 be	meaningless.	Well,	 I	 said	 to
myself,	 B.	 has	 lent	 himself,	 at	 any	 rate	 in	 this	 film,	 to	 something
unworthy	of	him.	Nevertheless,	he	has	lived	through	the	film,	carried
the	 excitements	 of	 the	 plot	 in	 his	 heart	 from	beginning	 to	 end,	 and
whatever	 a	 man	 of	 such	 caliber	 has	 experienced	 is	 unconditionally
lovable.	So	 far	my	 judgment	 is	 still	correct,	although	I	am	already	a
little	ahead	of	myself.	But	not	long	ago,	when	waiting	downstairs	for
the	 front	door	 to	be	opened,	gazing	at	 the	night	and	 recalling	 those
photographs,	 I	 found	myself	 pitying	 B.	 as	 though	 he	were	 the	most
unfortunate	 of	 men.	 This	 is	 how	 I	 imagine	 the	 situation:	 the
satisfaction	of	acting	is	over;	the	film	is	made;	B.	himself	can	no	longer
influence	 it	 in	any	way;	he	need	not	even	realize	that	he	had	allowed
himself	to	be	taken	advantage	of,	and	yet,	when	watching	himself	in
the	film,	he	may	become	aware	of	the	utter	futility	of	exerting	all	his
considerable	 powers	 and—I	 am	 not	 exaggerating	 my	 sense	 of
compassion—he	grows	older,	weak,	gets	pushed	aside	in	his	armchair,
and	vanishes	 somewhere	 into	 the	mists	of	 time.	How	wrong!	This	 is



just	where	the	error	of	my	judgment	lies.	Even	after	the	completion	of
the	film	Bassermann	goes	home	as	Bassermann,	and	no	one	else.	If	at
any	 time	he	 should	withdraw,	 he	will	withdraw	 completely,	 and	 be
gone;	he	will	not	do	as	 I	do,	and	would	 like	to	 impute	to	all	others,
which	 is	 to	 go	 on	 fluttering	 around	myself	 like	 a	 bird	 kept	 from	 its
nest	by	some	curse,	endlessly	fluttering	around	this	entirely	deserted
nest,	never	letting	it	out	of	its	sight.
Goodnight,	dearest.	May	I	kiss	you,	may	I	put	my	arms	around	your
body?

Franz

From	March	5	to	6,	1913
Past	10	o’clock,	dearest,	and	I	am	as	weary	as	you	were	the	day	before
yesterday.	 I’ve	 returned	 to	my	cold	 room,	 I	was	beginning	 (oh	dear,
now	I	can	hear	my	father	next	door	talking	about	the	factory)	to	feel
quite	limp	from	the	heat	next	door.	I	want	you	to	know	that	as	from
today	my	way	of	life	is	going	to	be	different	for	a	while;	if	it	has	been
intolerable	up	to	now,	perhaps	it	will	be	possible	some	other	way;	if
one	cannot	sleep	on	one’s	left	side,	one	turns	(needless	to	say	one	may
often	 regret	 it,	 in	 which	 case	 there	 is	 no	 end	 to	 the	 tossing	 and
turning)	to	lie	on	one’s	right,	and	really	the	life	I	lead	is	just	like	being
in	bed.	(Next	door	they	are	still	talking	about	the	factory,	it	makes	me
shudder;	 I	 do	 seem	 to	 have	 chosen	 the	 right	 moment	 to	 go.)	 The
changes	in	my	way	of	life	consist	in	my——
I	 broke	 off	 at	 this	 point,	 the	 room	next	 door	 had	 been	 vacated;	 I
said	 goodnight	 to	my	 parents	 and	 found	my	 father	 standing	 on	 the
sofa	winding	 the	 clock,	 and	went	 on	 into	 the	 living	 room,	 but	 as	 I
couldn’t	make	up	my	mind	to	continue	my	letter,	I	picked	up	Max	and
Felix’s	book	[Intuition	and	Concept]	and	once	again	 read	 the	opening
chapter,	parts	of	which	are	brilliantly	written,	as	 though	by	a	 third,
unknown,	 and	 very	 distinguished	 person.	 I	 had	 put	 the	 letter	 aside
because	I	suddenly	became	intensely	aware	that	I	never	stop	writing
about	 anything	 but	myself,	 perhaps	 even	 repeating	 the	 same	 things
again	 and	 again,	 and	 that	 it	 is	 objectionable	 to	 keep	 laying	 myself
bare	before	you	without	knowing	whether	it	is	not	making	you	shake
inside	with	horror,	 impatience,	or	boredom.	In	saying	this,	dearest,	I
do	not	doubt	you	in	any	way;	surely	lovers	can	talk	to	each	other	in
this	 fashion;	 it	 even	 says	 so	 in	 the	prologue	you	 sent	me	 today	 and



which	gave	me	a	great	deal	of	pleasure,	though	it	is	not	complete	and
in	 places	 far	 too	 superficial.	 Besides,	 dearest,	 please	 understand	me
and	 don’t	 be	 cross;	 I	 reproach	 myself	 with	 these	 things	 solely	 on
account	of	my	letters;	if	we	were	together	and	you	were	sitting	on	the
chair	beside	me	(I	am	just	pulling	it	a	little	closer	with	my	left	hand),
I	 would	 not	 so	 much	 as	 consider	 these	 possibilities,	 even	 if—as	 is
highly	probable—I	had	many	worse	 things	 to	 say	about	myself	 than
those	I	write.	(How	about	this,	Felice,	as	a	tiny	enticement	for	future
meetings?)	 Yes,	 you,	 from	 whom	 an	 upsetting	 letter	 may	 be
threatening	tomorrow,	should	be	sitting	in	this	chair,	the	table	should
be	pushed	aside,	and	our	hands	should	be	joined—a	vision	that	makes
me	 forget	 all	 about	my	 commission	 for	Budapest.	Needless	 to	 say	 it
has	been	carried	out.

Franz

From	March	6	to	7,	1913
No,	 that	 is	 not	 enough	 for	 me.	 I	 asked	 if	 it	 wasn’t	 above	 all
compassion	that	you	felt	for	me.	And	I	justified	my	question.	All	you
say	is:	No.	But	I	really	was	a	different	person	when	I	wrote	that	first
letter,	a	carbon	copy	of	which	(it	is	the	only	letter	I	have	a	copy	of)	I
found	 a	 few	 days	 ago	 during	 a	 perfunctory	 tidying	 up	 of	 my	 desk
(which	never	gets	 tidied	 in	any	other	way).	 I	was	different,	 this	you
cannot	deny,	and	even	 if	 I	had	occasional	 lapses,	 I	 could	easily	 find
my	 way	 back.	 Have	 I	 been	 misleading	 you	 then,	 right	 up	 to	 these
unhappy	 times?	 There	 are	 only	 two	 possibilities:	 either	 you	 feel
nothing	but	 compassion	 for	me,	 in	which	 case	why	do	 I	 insist	upon
your	love,	obstruct	your	every	course,	force	you	to	write	and	think	of
me	 every	 day,	 tyrannize	 you	 with	 a	 helpless	 man’s	 helpless	 love?
Why,	 instead,	don’t	 I	 try	 to	 find	a	way	of	gently	helping	you	to	 free
yourself	from	me,	of	quietly	by	myself	savoring	the	knowledge	of	your
compassion	 for	 me,	 and	 thus	 at	 least	 becoming	 worthy	 of	 that
compassion?	 The	 second	 possibility	 is	 that	 compassion	 is	 not
exclusively	what	 you	 feel	 for	me;	 rather	 that	 you	 have	 been	misled
during	 the	 past	 six	months;	 you	 lack	 true	 insight	 into	my	wretched
personality,	 disregard	 my	 confessions,	 and	 unconsciously	 prevent
yourself	 from	 believing	 in	 them,	 although	 this	would	 be	 very	much
against	 your	 nature.	 In	 that	 case,	 why	 don’t	 I	 do	 everything	 in	my
power	 to	 make	 the	 situation	 perfectly	 clear	 to	 you?	 Why	 don’t	 I



choose	 the	 plainest,	 shortest	words	 that	 can	 be	 neither	 disregarded,
misunderstood,	nor	forgotten?	Could	it	be	that	I	still	have	some	hope,
or	am	toying	with	the	hope,	of	being	able	to	keep	you?	If	this	be	so,	as
it	 sometimes	 seems	 to	 be,	 then	 it	would	 be	my	 duty	 to	 step	 out	 of
myself	and	quite	ruthlessly	defend	you	against	myself.
However,	 there	 is	 yet	 a	 third	 possibility:	 compassion	may	 not	 be
exclusively	what	 you	 feel	 for	me,	 and	 you	may	 even	have	 a	 perfect
understanding	of	my	present	state,	but	may	think	that	at	some	time	I
might	yet	turn	into	a	useful	human	being	with	whom	a	steady,	calm,
lively	relationship	would	be	possible.	If	this	is	what	you	think,	you	are
under	 a	 terrible	 misapprehension;	 as	 I	 have	 told	 you	 before,	 my
present	 state	 (and	 today	 it	 is	 comparative	 paradise)	 is	 not	 an
exceptional	 state.	Don’t	 succumb,	 Felice,	 to	 these	misapprehensions!
Not	for	2	days	could	you	live	beside	me.	I	received	a	letter	today	from
an	18-year-old	schoolboy	whom	I	have	met	2	or	3	times	at	Baum’s.	At
the	 end	 of	 the	 letter	 he	 calls	 himself	my	 “very	 obedient	 disciple.”	 I
feel	sick	at	the	thought	of	it.	What	a	preposterous	notion!	I	can	never
tear	myself	open	wide	enough	to	people	 to	reveal	everything	and	so
frighten	them	away.	To	which	of	course	I	must	add	that	even	if	I	were
a	hero,	I	should	want	to	frighten	the	schoolboy	away,	because	I	don’t
like	him	(probably	on	account	of	his	youth),	whereas	I	should	want	to
drag	you,	dearest,	eternally	dearest,	down	to	the	dreadful	decrepitude
that	I	represent.

Franz

From	March	7	to	8,	1913
I	have	 taken	my	weariness	with	me,	dearest,	 to	 the	 cabaret	where	 I
am	 now	 sitting	 writing	 to	 you	 during	 the	 intermission.	 The	 music
distracts	me,	smoke	comes	fuming	into	my	face,	a	female	dancer	(Oh,
my	 God,	 how	 well	 I	 understand	 dancing!)	 who	 took	 the	 part	 of	 a
sailor	(what	vitality	and	stamping	of	feet	and	flexing	of	the	body,	with
head	slightly	 lowered,	as	she	began	her	 turn	once	again)	 is	 standing
about	in	the	foyer	asking	to	be	looked	at—nevertheless	I	am	happy	to
be	clinging	to	this,	your	paper	and	thus—strange	as	it	may	seem	to	be
writing	letters	in	this	place—precisely	by	doing	so—no	one	knows	it—
being	a	man	among	men.
My	question	about	coming	to	Berlin	on	the	1st	was	indeed	a	kind	of
joke,	 even	 if	 not	meant	 to	 be	 particularly	 funny—but	 the	 stamps	 of



the	advertising	exhibition,	were	they	even	as	much	as	a	question?
A	letter	such	as	yours	of	today,	dearest,	is	only	too	well	designed	to
make	me	careless	in	my	efforts	to	explain	myself	to	you,	and	in	trying
to	convince	you	of	the	impossibility	of	any	kind	of	human	relationship
with	me.	And	even	if	today—every	day	lost	to	this	purpose	seems	like
a	 reproach—under	 the	 influence	 of	 your	 letter,	 which	 I	 read	 again
hurriedly	before	leaving	home,	and	am	carrying	in	my	inside	pocket—
the	bell!	The	lights	are	going	down.
So	very	late.	And	yet	I	left	long	before	the	end,	not	only	on	account
of	my	eternal	exhaustion,	all	day	my	head	has	been	waiting	frantically
for	me	to	close	my	eyes,	but	also	because	it	always	does	me	good	to
escape	 from	 any	 circumscribed	 group	 before	 its	 general	 dissolution.
Can	you	understand	that?
And	now,	dearest,	take	me	as	I	am,	but	don’t	forget,	don’t	forget	to
throw	me	out	at	the	right	moment!

Franz

March	9,	1913
Sunday,	before	lunch.
Dear	Felice,	why	do	your	 letters	make	me	weak	and	arrest	my	pen,
which	wants	to	keep	on	endlessly	writing	the	truth	about	myself,	the
sad	revelations?
I	was	different	 in	 the	beginning,	 this	 you	admit,	 but	 it	would	not
really	matter;	the	point	is	that	what	has	led	me	from	there	to	here	is
not	 a	 straight	 line	 of	 human	 development;	 on	 the	 contrary,	 I	 am
completely	thrown	back	onto	my	old	tracks,	but	between	the	old	and
the	new	there	is	no	communication,	neither	straight	nor	zigzag,	there
is	only	a	sad,	empty,	phantom	road.	(It	is	now	after	lunch.	Little	Felix
has	just	been	conveyed	in	the	governess’	arms	through	my	room	into
the	bedroom;	behind	him	comes	my	father,	behind	him	my	brother-in-
law,	behind	him	my	sister.	He	has	just	been	put	down	in	my	mother’s
bed,	and	now	my	father,	 from	my	room,	 is	 listening	at	 the	bedroom
door	in	the	hope	that	Felix	will	call	him	again,	for	he	is	the	one	Felix
loves	 best	 of	 all.	 There,	 he	 has	 just	 called	 out	 “Dje-Dje,”	 meaning
Grandfather,	and	now	my	father,	 trembling	with	joy,	opens	the	door
several	 times,	quickly	pops	his	head	 through	 the	door	 several	 times,
and	so	entices	the	child	to	further	Dje-Dje-calls.)
But	 the	 things	 about	 you	 that	 have	 changed,	 Felice,	 were	 only



minor	details	on	the	very	edge	of	your	existence	which,	in	the	course
of	these	months,	has	unfolded	under	my	eyes,	unfolded	from	a	divine,
unchanging	core.
Of	 my	 complaints	 you	 say,	 “I	 don’t	 believe	 them,	 and	 you	 don’t

believe	 them,	 either.”	 The	misfortune	 lies	 in	 this	 very	 notion,	 and	 I
myself	am	not	free	of	blame.	I	cannot	deny	that	I	have	acquired	great
experience	in	complaining	(alas,	with	perfect	justification),	so	that	the
plaintive	 note	 is,	 as	 to	 the	 beggars	 in	 the	 streets,	 constantly	 at	 my
command,	even	when	I	don’t	feel	quite	like	it	at	heart.	But	I	recognize
the	duty	to	convince	you,	which	hangs	over	me	every	moment	of	the
day,	 and	 for	 this	 reason	 complain	 automatically,	 without	 thinking,
and	needless	to	say	thereby	achieve	the	opposite.	“You	don’t	believe
them,”	and	then	you	transfer	your	disbelief	to	the	genuine	complaints
as	well.
But	enough	of	that!	An	end	to	it	all,	at	least	for	what	remains	of	this

letter.	For	various	reasons	I	felt	particularly	alone	yesterday	evening,
which	is	actually	the	best	of	all	feelings;	nobody	bothers	one	(even	if
one	happens	 to	be	walking	with	a	great	number	of	 relatives);	one	 is
surrounded	 by	 a	 void,	 everything	 is	meticulously	 prepared	 for	 your
coming.	 And	 then	 you	 did	 come,	 were	 quite	 close	 to	 me,	 however
lonely,	almost	grotesquely	lonely	I	may	have	been	looking.

Franz

From	March	9	to	10,	1913
Really,	 how	 unreasonable	 and	 slack	 is	 the	 life	 I	 lead!	 I	 don’t	 even
want	 to	 talk	 about	 it.	 I	 have	 spent	 this	 Sunday	 hanging	 my	 head
without	 being	 unhappy,	 sitting	 around	without	 being	 unduly	 bored,
going	 for	 a	walk	with	 Felix,	 and	 then	 (almost	with	 a	 sigh	 of	 relief)
alone,	and	yet,	whatever	 I	did,	 there	was	always	 that	 sensation	of	a
fist	in	my	neck.
“The	 feeling	 that	 you	might	be	 taken	 from	me”—how	could	 I	 not

have	it,	dearest,	since	I	deny	myself	the	right	(but	“right”	is	not	strong
enough,	“deny”	is	not	strong	enough!),	since	I	deny	myself	the	right	to
keep	you?	Don’t	deceive	yourself,	dearest;	the	cause	of	the	trouble	lies
not	in	the	distance;	on	the	contrary,	it	is	this	very	distance	that	gives
me	 at	 least	 the	 semblance	 of	 having	 some	 right	 to	 you,	 and	 I	 am
holding	on	 to	 that,	 insofar	 as	one	 can	hold	on	 to	uncertainties	with
uncertain	hands.



By	the	way,	last	night	I	discovered	something	that	should	have	been
terrible,	 but	 in	 fact	 came	 almost	 as	 a	 relief.	 I	 got	 home	 late	 from
Baum’s,	I	did	not	feel	like	writing	to	you	then,	though	there	is	so	little
variation	 within	 my	moods	 that	 it	 makes	 no	 sense	 to	 preserve	 any
single	one	for	my	letters	to	you,	and	so	I	might	well	have	written	and
enjoyed	 the	benefit,	 but	 I	 did	not	write;	 nor	did	 I	 feel	 like	 going	 to
bed;	 I	 still	 felt	 too	great	an	uneasiness	within	myself	after	 taking	an
admittedly	 only	 very	 short	 walk	 with	 my	 relatives	 whom,	 after	 a
premature	parting	from	Max,	his	wife,	and	Felix,	I	had	gone	to	meet
at	 the	 coffeehouse—and	 so,	 because	 the	 notebooks	 containing	 my
novel	happened	to	be	lying	there	(by	some	chance	these	books,	 long
unused,	 had	 risen	 to	 the	 surface),	 I	 looked	 at	 these	 books	 and	 read
them	 at	 first	 with	 unconcerned	 confidence,	 as	 though	 I	 knew	 from
memory	the	exact	sequence	of	what	was	good,	 fairly	good,	and	bad,
but	grew	more	and	more	amazed,	and	finally	came	to	the	irrefutable
conclusion	that	of	the	entire	book	only	the	first	chapter	stems	from	an
inner	truth,	while	all	the	rest,	with	the	exception,	of	course,	of	some
isolated	short	and	even	longer	passages,	was	written	as	 it	were	from
recollections	of	deep	but	totally	absent	feelings,	and	consequently	has
to	 be	 rejected—i.e.,	 out	 of	 some	 400	 large	 pages	 only	 56	 (I	 think)
remain.	If	the	200-odd	pages	of	an	utterly	useless	version	of	the	story,
written	 in	 the	winter	 and	 spring	 of	 last	 year,	 are	 added	 to	 the	 350
pages,	then	for	this	story	I	wrote	a	total	of	550	worthless	pages.	But
now	goodnight,	my	poor	dearest,	dream	of	pleasanter	 things	 than	of
your

Franz

From	March	10	to	11,	1912	[1913]
What	is	it	that	I	have	done	to	deserve	the	box	with	these	nice	flowers?
§	 I	 am	 not	 aware	 of	 having	 done	 anything	 to	 deserve	 them,	 and	 it
would	have	been	far	more	appropriate	if	a	demon	had	been	hidden	in
the	box,	had	taken	a	nip	at	my	nose,	and	had	refused	to	let	go,	so	that
I	should	have	to	carry	him	around	with	me	forever.	Do	you	know	that
I	 never	 had	 any	 real	 feeling	 for	 flowers,	 and	 even	 now	 can	 only
appreciate	 flowers	 provided	 they	 come	 from	 you,	 and	 even	 then	 I
appreciate	them	only	indirectly	through	your	love	of	them.	Ever	since
my	 childhood	 there	 have	 been	 times	 when	 I	 was	 almost	 unhappy
about	my	inability	to	appreciate	flowers.	This	inability	is	associated	to



some	 extent	 with	 my	 inability	 to	 appreciate	 music,	 at	 least	 I	 have
often	 sensed	 a	 connection.	 I	 am	 hardly	 able	 to	 see	 the	 beauty	 of
flowers;	 one	 rose	 is	 to	 me	 a	 thing	 of	 indifference,	 two	 become	 too
much	 alike,	 an	 arrangement	 of	 flowers	 always	 seems	 to	 me	 both
haphazard	and	ineffective.	And,	as	is	the	way	with	deficiencies,	I	have
often	tried	to	pretend	to	others	that	I	had	a	special	liking	for	flowers.
As	 with	 all	 conscious	 deficiencies,	 I	 succeeded	 in	 deceiving	 those
people	who	had	but	a	vague	liking	for	flowers,	not	otherwise	apparent
in	 any	 aspect	 of	 their	 character.	 For	 example,	 my	mother	 certainly
thinks	 I	 am	a	 lover	of	 flowers,	 because	 I	 like	 giving	 them	 to	people
and	because	 flowers	on	wire	almost	make	me	shudder.	But	 the	wire
does	not	really	worry	me	on	the	flowers’	account;	I	am	thinking	only
of	myself,	and	that	piece	of	metal	twining	itself	into	a	living	thing	is
abhorrent	 to	 me	 for	 this	 very	 reason.	 I	 might	 not	 have	 become	 so
much	aware	of	being	a	stranger	among	flowers,	if	toward	the	end	of
my	 schooldays	 and	during	my	 time	 at	 the	 university	 I	 hadn’t	 had	 a
great	 friend	 (his	 first	 name	 was	 Ewald	 [Přibram],	 almost	 a	 flower-
name,	 don’t	 you	 think?)	 who,	 without	 being	 especially	 sensitive	 to
delicate	impressions,	even	without	having	any	feeling	for	music,	had
such	 a	 passion	 for	 flowers	 that	 if,	 for	 example,	 he	 happened	 to	 be
looking	at	flowers,	cutting	them	(he	had	a	beautiful	garden),	watering
them,	arranging	them	in	a	vase,	carrying	them,	or	giving	them	to	me
(what	am	I	going	to	do	with	them?	I	often	used	to	ask	myself,	and	yet
did	not	 like	 to	 say	 so	 explicitly,	 although	 in	 general	 terms	 I	 said	 so
often	enough,	for	after	all	he	was	not	to	be	deceived),	he	was	literally
transformed	by	his	love,	so	much	so	that	his	whole	voice	changed—I
could	 almost	 say	 acquired	 a	 ringing	 tone,	 despite	 the	 slight
impediment	in	his	speech.	We	would	often	stand	by	the	flower	beds,
he	gazing	at	the	flowers,	while	I,	in	my	boredom,	gazed	beyond	them.
I	wonder	what	he	would	say	now	if	he	could	see	me	lifting	the	flowers
carefully	 out	 of	 their	 box,	 pressing	 them	 to	my	 face,	 and	 gazing	 at
them	 for	 a	 long	 time!	 How	 can	 I	 thank	 you	 for	 all	 your	 love	 and
kindness,	Felice?

Franz,
written	close	underneath.

From	March	11	to	12	[1913]
It	is	sad,	Felice;	you	are	worried,	and	I	have	to	listen	to	your	worries



like	someone	who	is	not	only	blind	and	dumb,	but	also	unable	to	use
his	limbs,	whose	hearing	is	all	that’s	left	to	him.	For	me,	the	worst	of
it	is	that	I	am	doing,	or	at	least	have	done	you	an	injustice,	for	since
you	stopped	writing	on	this	subject,	once	even	ignored	my	allusion	to
it,	 I	 imagined	 that	your	 journey	and	your	 sister’s	 journey	had	either
cleared	 up	 the	 trouble,	 or	 at	 least	 brought	 it	 to	 a	 point	 where	 no
deterioration	 or	 further	 upsets	 would	 occur.	 This	 is	 what	 I	 thought
when	I	wrote	my	most	recent	 letters	and,	quite	harmlessly,	expected
you	to	take	an	interest	in	my	affairs,	whereas	all	the	time—admittedly
without	 so	much	 as	 a	 hint—you	were	 still	 struggling	with	 your	 old
worries.	I	really	do	not	wish	to	be	told,	dearest;	after	all,	it	is	not	your
secret,	it’s	your	sister’s;	but	I	always	want	to	know	when	you	are	“at
the	end	of	your	tether,”	so	that	to	my	innate	brutality	in	my	treatment
of	a	being	such	as	you,	I	do	not	add	the	brutality	due	to	my	ignorance
of	the	situation.	Would	you	lend	me	a	picture	of	your	sister	for	2	days,
so	 that	 I	 know	who	 it	 is	 you	are	worrying	about?	Are	you	 the	only
person	 aware	 of	 her	 misfortune?	 Does	 Toni,	 for	 instance,	 know
nothing?
How	sad	it	is!	And	how	helpless	I	am!	Surely	the	best	thing	would
be	to	come	to	Berlin,	take	you	in	my	arms,	and	carry	you	back	here.
But	 if	 I	were	capable	of	 that,	 I	would	have	done	 it	 long	ago.	 I	have
been	thinking	for	some	time:	May	I	call	you	“Fe”?	This	was	how	you
sometimes	 used	 to	 sign	 your	 letters;	 it	 also	 reminds	 one	 of	 “Fee”
[fairy],	 and	 of	 the	 beautiful	 land	 of	 China,	 and	 finally	 it	 is	 a	most
suitable	syllable	to	whisper	 in	your	ear.	Well?	Fe?	Agree	only	 if	you
like	it;	you	are	dear	to	me	by	whatever	name.
What	a	strange	confession	in	today’s	letter!	You	consider	yourself	a
weak	 girl	 who	 even	 in	 peaceful	moments	 doesn’t	 know	what	 to	 do
with	herself!	Listen,	surely	you	are	not	trying	to	disguise	yourself,	and
frighten	me	with	myself?	I	should	like	to	know	what	led	you	to	make
the	 remark	 and	 how	 its	 conception	 can	 be	 traced	 back	 beyond
Saturday	night.	“Not	 to	know	what	 to	do	with	oneself”—you	should
be	spared	that,	at	least	in	the	long	run;	trust	me,	I	have	experience	in
these	matters;	 such	 people	 neither	 look	 like	 you,	 nor	 do	 they	 have
your	eyes.	Your	present	state	can	only	be	due	to	the	fact	that	you	find
other	people’s	 sufferings	harder	 to	bear	 than	your	own,	and	 thus	by
outward	 causes	 are	 thrown	 into	 a	 state	 of	 confusion	 such	 as	 you
would	never	encounter	from	within.

Franz



From	March	12	to	13,	1913
Only	 a	 few	words,	my	 dearest,	 it	 is	 better	 that	way.	 It’s	 already	 so
late.	 I	was	 at	Max’s,	 and	 then	 at	 the	 coffeehouse.	 I	 filled	myself	 up
with	 all	 kinds	 of	 reading,	 I	 was	 alone.	 Perhaps	 I	 should	 have	 gone
home	earlier	after	all;	when	entering	the	coffeehouse	I	drew	back	for
an	 instant,	 but	went	 in	 nevertheless;	 it	was	 too	 late	 to	 get	 home	 in
time	for	supper,	and	by	then	my	thirst	for	magazines	had	grown	too
strong.	As	I	took	hold	of	the	chair,	ready	to	sit	down,	I	still	wondered
if	I	ought	to	stay.	And	now	it	is	very	late,	and	I	am	touching	you	with
the	tips	of	my	fingers	only.	A	very	good	night!

Franz

From	March	13	to	14,	1913
Is	one	any	calmer?	Is	sorrow	receding?	One	might	think	so,	judging	by
today’s	 letter,	and	 I	wish	 it	were	 so,	but	 I	 lack	confidence.	You	 find
you	can’t	read?	No	wonder.	When	would	you	have	the	time?	But	how
did	 you,	 Felice	 dearest,	 how	 did	 you	 come	 across	Uriel	 Acosta?64	 I
don’t	know	the	play	either,	nor	do	I	think	I	could	read	it,	though	what
you	jokingly	say	about	your	brain	is	actually	true	of	mine.	But	it	may
be	that	a	brain	has	to	dry	up	and	harden,	so	that	when	the	time	comes
one	 can	 strike	 a	 spark	 from	 it.—This	 is	 what	 I	 was	 about	 to	 write
when,	as	I	was	sitting	alone	in	the	living	room,	my	sister	rang	the	bell;
she	had	returned	home	from	the	cinematographic	theater	and	I	had	to
let	her	in.	I	had	been	interrupted,	so	abandoned	the	letter.	My	sister
talked	about	the	performance,	or	rather	I	questioned	her	about	it,	for
although	I	myself	rarely	go	to	the	cinematographic	theater,	 I	usually
know	by	heart	almost	all	the	weekly	programs	in	every	one	of	them.
My	need	for	pleasure	and	distraction	feeds	on	posters;	when	looking
at	posters	I	derive	some	relief	from	my	habitual	inner	uneasiness,	that
everlasting	feeling	of	impermanence;	whenever	I	returned	to	the	city
after	the	summer	vacation,	which	invariably	turned	out	to	have	been
unsatisfactory,	I	 felt	a	great	thirst	for	posters,	and,	from	the	tram	on
my	 way	 home,	 swiftly	 and	 with	 some	 effort	 I	 used	 to	 read
fragmentary	 snatches	 of	 the	 posters	 we	 were	 passing.—Sometimes,
and	I	don’t	know	why,	everything	I	want	to	say	to	you	presses	upon
me	with	great	 intensity,	 like	a	crowd	of	people	all	 trying	 to	squeeze
through	a	narrow	door	at	once.	And	I	have	said	nothing	to	you,	less
than	nothing,	for	everything	I	have	written	recently	has	been	false—



not	 fundamentally,	 of	 course,	 because	 fundamentally	 everything	 is
true—but	with	so	much	confusion	and	falseness	on	the	surface	that	no
one	 could	 be	 expected	 to	 see	 through	 it.	 Can	 you,	 dearest?	 No,
certainly	not.	But	let	us	leave	it	for	now,	it	is	very	late.	I	was	delayed
by	my	sister,	who	had	seen	La	Broyeuse	des	Cæœurs,	the	Heartbreaker.
And	then	I	spent	far	too	long	reading	a	scientific	book.	How	would	it
be,	dearest,	if	instead	of	letters	I	were	to	send	you	pages	of	my	diary?
No	matter	how	little	happens,	how	pointless	it	may	be,	how	great	my
indifference	to	it	all.	I	miss	not	keeping	a	diary.65	But	unless	you	were
to	 read	 it,	 it	 wouldn’t	 be	 a	 diary	 to	 me.	 And	 the	 changes	 and
omissions	necessary	in	a	diary	meant	for	you	would	surely	be	all	the
more	beneficial	and	instructive	for	me.	Do	you	agree?	The	difference
as	 compared	 to	 my	 letters	 will	 be	 that	 the	 pages	 of	 my	 diary	 may
sometimes	 contain	more	 substance,	 but	will	 certainly	 be	 even	more
boring	 and	 even	 more	 brutal	 than	 my	 letters.	 But	 don’t	 be	 too
alarmed;	my	love	for	you	will	not	be	absent	from	them.	What	ought
you	to	read?	But	I	don’t	know	what	you	have	read.	And	I	still	haven’t
received	that	much-requested	booklist.	Offhand	I	would	say	read	The
Sorrows	 of	 Werther.66	 Just	 recently,	 strangely	 enough,	 I	 have	 often
thought	about	your	father	and	kept	meaning	to	ask	if	he	had	finished
reading	At	Sunrise.	 Listen,	 Felice,	 you	 don’t	 think	 about	me	 enough;
yesterday	I	learned	that	the	Berliner	Tageblatt	recently	had	a	review	by
Stoessl	 of	 Intensity	 of	 Feeling.	 And	 you	 didn’t	 send	 it	 to	 me.	 I	 am
enclosing	two	newspaper	clippings	that	appeared	today	and	happen	to
be	 close	 at	 hand.	 The	 short	 story,	 in	 fact,	 is	 as	 uncharacteristic	 of
Oskar	 as	 the	 essay	 is	 of	 Felix;	 they	 can	 both	 do	 very	 much	 better
work;	one	of	these	days	you	are	sure	to	be	amazed	by	Oskar’s	better
work,	while	that	of	Felix	will	leave	you	cold.	(And	me	no	less	so.)67
With	all	your	suffering	on	Sunday	you	did	the	cooking	as	well,	and
such	 appetizing	 things!	 This	 morning	 I	 had	 to	 regret	 that	 my
principles	 would	 not	 allow	 me	 to	 eat	 anything:	 your	 account	 had
given	me	such	an	appetite.	Of	course	 it’s	only	a	theoretical	appetite,
since	I	always	enjoy	watching	people	eat.
Adieu,	Felice,	and	my	very	special	thanks	for	today’s	long	letter.

Franz

From	March	14	to	15,	1912	[1913]
It	started	with	an	inkblot,	I	didn’t	change	the	paper,	perhaps	this	may



even	bring	a	little	reality	to	my	writing,	which	(haven’t	you	noticed	it,
dearest?)	is	becoming	increasingly	unreal,	conjured	up	out	of	the	air.
—Otherwise	 only	 a	 few	 words;	 it’s	 late	 again;	 I	 went	 to	 the
cinematograph	with	Felix	to	see	The	Other	One,	and	then	for	a	walk.
To	avoid	a	 repetition	 tomorrow	of	a	morning	 such	as	 I	had	 today,	 I
won’t	 write	 any	 more	 now.	 You	 know,	 dearest,	 with	 his	 absolute
stability	 my	 chief	 at	 the	 office	 gives	 me	 strength;	 I	 am	 unable	 to
follow	his	example,	but	 I	can	 imitate	him	consciously	up	 to	a	point,
beyond	that	point	unconsciously,	and	furthermore	I	am	able	at	least	to
observe	him,	and	so	have	something	to	go	by;	today	he	was	ill.	When
he	 is	 not	 at	 the	 office	 I	 have	 to	 undertake	 at	 his	 desk,	 both	 in	 the
morning	and	at	noon,	the	distribution	of	the	entire	mail.	Well,	I	lay	in
that	armchair	in	a	state	of	dissolution;	people	came,	I	neither	saw	nor
heard	them;	I	examined	uninteresting	letters	with	a	fixed	stare;	I	kept
thinking	I	ought	to	be	at	home	and	in	bed,	but—just	imagine—I	didn’t
expect	 even	 my	 bed,	 even	 a	 quiet	 rest	 to	 bring	 about	 any
improvement.	Well,	 to	 some	 extent	 this	 is	 not	 difficult	 to	 explain:	 I
sleep	little,	fitfully,	and	badly;	I	don’t	take	much	exercise,	am	utterly
dissatisfied	 with	 myself,	 all	 of	 which	 made	 me	 collapse	 quite
helplessly	into	the	armchair.	That	there	was	no	letter	from	you	today	I
could	 hardly	 believe;	 I	 was	 far	 too	 feeble	 for	 it	 to	make	me	 either
unhappy	 or	 uneasy	 (and	 I	 repeat	 once	 again,	 dearest,	 it	 is	 of	 no
importance	whatever	if	for	once	you	haven’t	time	to	write);	it	was	just
that	I	couldn’t	quite	understand	it,	and	though	I	haven’t	given	it	much
thought,	 it	 was	 surely	 another	 reason	 for	 all	 this	 pointless	 sitting
around.	And	 there	was	 hardly	 any	 change	 for	 the	 better	 during	 the
entire	morning.	 I	walked	home	like	a	sick	man,	with	the	 idea	of	 the
distance	still	to	be	covered	constantly	before	me.	But	I	am	not	ill;	 in
fact,	I	don’t	look	any	different,	except	that	I	have	one	line	above	my
nose,	 and	 an	 ever-increasing,	 by	 now	 fairly	 noticeable	 quantity	 of
gray	hair.
After	having	slept	a	little	this	evening,	and	somewhat	cheered	up	by

Bassermann,	I	even	felt	quite	well	at	moments,	and	we—Felix	and	I—
got	 along	 very	 nicely	 today.	 I	 could	 tell	 you	 a	 great	 deal	 about
Bassermann,	 however	 wretched	 the	 play,	 and	 however	 much
Bassermann	is	abused	and	abuses	himself.—Goodnight,	dearest,	and	a
pleasant	Sunday.	I	place	my	compliments	to	your	Papa	in	your	eyes.

Franz



March	16,	1913
Sunday,	 and	 no	 news.	 Now	 that	 is	 really	 very	 sad.	 Perhaps,	 my
dearest,	you	want	to	write	or	can	write	only	every	other	day,	indeed	it
may	 well	 be	 better—I	 keep	 thinking	 anything	 is	 better	 than	 the
present	arrangement—but	then	let	us	agree	upon	it.	I	shall	continue	to
write	every	day.
Dearest,	 dearest	 Felice!	How	 I	 literally	 implored	you	 last	night!	 If
only	 I	 deserved	 you	 (this	 you	 cannot	 judge)	 as	much	 as	 I	 need	 you
(this,	at	times,	you	undoubtedly	suspect)!	But	deserving	and	needing
are	 like	 dreaming	 and	 waking:	 the	 connection	 between	 them	 is
blurred.
Again	I	don’t	like	Fe	as	much	as	Felice;	it’s	too	short;	it	doesn’t	give
one’s	 breath	 time	 to	 linger.	 If	 only	 I	 could	 once,	 Felice—for	 once
would	be	always—be	so	close	to	you	that	talking	and	listening	would
be	 one:	 silence.—They	 are	 quarreling	 in	 the	 kitchen	 about	 a	 stolen
sausage,	and	distracting	me.	It	is	not	only	they	who	distract	me,	inside
I	am	exulting	with	forces	that	are	distracting.
But	dearest,	why	do	you	allow	yourself	to	be	so	much	influenced	by
me	that	an	automobile	accident	appears	to	you	to	be	the	best	solution
to	one’s	troubles?	That	is	certainly	not	you,	dearest!	I	really	must	have
been	sitting	beside	you	in	that	automobile.	While	you	live	with	these
possible	dangers,	I	grapple	with	shadows;	if	I	were	not	one	myself,	it
would	be	incomprehensible.	Personally	I	can	think	of	nothing	better—
and	when	 reading	 such	news,	my	desire	becomes	 immense—than	 to
stop	 with	my	 own	 body	 any	 automobile	 in	 which	 you	might	 be	 in
danger.	 It	would	be	 the	closest	contact	of	which	 I	am	worthy	and,	 I
hope,	capable.
Your	sister	[Erna]	bears	no	more	than	a	 faint	resemblance	to	you,
but	even	if	there	were	none,	and	I	knew	only	that	she	is	your	sister,	I
should	have	to	love	her.	The	expression	in	her	eyes,	and	the	way	they
are	set	 in	relation	to	her	nose,	belong	to	a	 type	of	Jewish	girl	 that	 I
have	always	felt	close	to.	Then	there	is	a	special	gentleness	around	the
mouth.	 And	 yet	 on	 the	whole	 she	 is	 very	 strong,	 it	 seems,	 and	 not
easily	crushed	by	misfortune.	And	then	she	also	has	a	girl	friend	who
looks	 after	 her	 and	 comes	 to	 Berlin	 on	 her	 account?	Her	 coiffure	 is
rather	unnecessarily	large,	but	the	picture	may	date	from	a	time	when
one	could	not	get	along	without	curls.
What	 will	 you	 be	 doing,	 dearest,	 for	 Easter?	 Are	 you	 staying	 in
Berlin?	 And	 if	 you	 do	 stay	 in	 Berlin,	 will	 many	 demands	 be	 made



upon	you?	Why	is	it	that	your	father	is	now	spending	so	much	time	in
Berlin?.	Your	sister	[Erna]	 is	probably	also	coming	home	for	Easter?
Still	 no	 news	 from	 Budapest?	 Could	 my	 grocer	 have	 forgotten	 that
parcel?	 Baum	 will	 definitely	 be	 reading	 on	 April	 14th.	 You	 will
probably	have	left	Berlin	by	then.	A	pity,	a	great	pity!

Franz

From	March	16	to	17,	1913
A	point-blank	question,	Felice:	At	Easter,	that	is,	Sunday	or	Monday,
would	you	have	any	one	hour	to	spare	for	me,	and	if	so,	would	you
consider	it	a	good	thing	if	I	came?	I	repeat:	it	could	be	any	one	hour;	I
would	 do	 nothing	 in	 Berlin	 but	 wait	 for	 it	 (I	 know	 few	 people	 in
Berlin,	 and	 don’t	 wish	 to	 see	 even	 those	 few,	 especially	 since	 they
would	expect	me	to	meet	a	lot	of	literary	people,	and	my	own	worries
are	too	mixed	up	for	me	to	stand	that),	and	if	it	couldn’t	be	one	whole
hour,	then	4	quarters	of	an	hour	would	do	just	as	well;	I	wouldn’t	miss
a	single	one,	 I	wouldn’t	move	 from	the	vicinity	of	 the	 telephone.	So
the	most	important	question	is	whether	you	consider	it	a	good	thing,
and	whether	you	are	aware	of	the	kind	of	visitor	to	expect.	But	I	do
not	want	to	see	your	relatives,	dearest;	I	am	not	fit	for	that	at	present,
and	shall	be	even	less	so	in	Berlin;	and	when	I	say	this	I	am	not	in	the
least	considering	that	I	have	hardly	a	suit	of	clothes	 left	 in	which	to
appear	before	you,	even	you.	Not	that	this	is	of	any	importance,	but
one	 is	 so	 tempted	 to	 avoid	 the	 important	 issues—which	 in	 any	 case
you	will	see	and	hear—and	take	refuge	in	unimportant	ones.	So	think
it	over	carefully,	Felice.	You	may	not	have	the	time,	in	which	case	no
thought	 is	 required;	 everyone	 is	bound	 to	be	home	 for	Easter—your
father,	 your	 brother,	 your	 sister	 from	 Dresden;	 your	 approaching
move	 will	 keep	 you	 busy;	 you	 will	 have	 to	make	 arrangements	 for
your	 trip	 to	 Frankfurt.	 In	 short,	 I	 shall	 understand	 perfectly	 if	 you
don’t	 have	 the	 time;	 I	 am	 not	 saying	 this	 simply	 on	 account	 of	my
own	indecision,	for	I	would	then	make	an	effort	to	come	to	Frankfurt
in	April,	should	you	be	in	favor	of	it.—So	answer	me	soon.

Franz

March	17,	1913
Just	a	 few	words,	dearest.	First,	my	special	 thanks	 for	your	 letter;	 it



arrived	 just	 in	 time	 to	 bring	 a	 person,	 who	 was	 heart	 and	 soul	 in
Berlin,	 a	 little	 nearer	 to	 his	 senses	 again.	 But	 secondly,	 something
unpleasant,	but	very	typical	of	me.	I	don’t	know	if	 I	shall	be	able	to
come.	It	is	still	uncertain	today,	tomorrow	it	may	be	definite.	I	don’t
want	to	discuss	the	reason	until	it	has	been	decided.	By	Wednesday	at
10	 o’clock	 you	 should	 know	 for	 certain.	 But	 it	 is	 definitely	 nothing
serious;	we	shall	see.	But	go	on	loving	me	despite	this	dithering.

Franz

From	March	17	to	18,	1913
You	are	right,	Felice;	recently	I	have	sometimes	had	to	force	myself	to
write	to	you;	but	writing	to	you	and	living	have	drawn	very	near	to
each	other,	and	I	also	have	to	force	myself	to	live.	Shouldn’t	I?
Moreover,	hardly	a	word	comes	to	me	from	the	fundamental	source,
but	 is	 seized	 upon	 fortuitously	 and	with	 great	 difficulty	 somewhere
along	the	way.	When	I	was	in	the	swing	of	writing	and	living,	I	once
wrote	 to	 you	 that	 no	 true	 feeling	 need	 search	 for	 corresponding
words,	but	is	confronted	or	even	impelled	by	them.	Perhaps	this	is	not
quite	true,	after	all.68
But	how	could	my	writing	to	you,	however	firm	my	hand,	achieve
everything	I	want	to	achieve:	To	convince	you	that	my	two	requests
are	equally	serious:	“Go	on	loving	me”	and	“Hate	me!”
But	that	you	don’t	think	about	me	enough,	this	I	do	mean	seriously.
For	if	you	did,	you	would	have	sent	me	that	gray	hair.—My	hair	is	not
only	gray	at	the	temples;	no,	my	whole	head	is	going	gray,	and	at	the
thought	 of	 you	 not	 being	 able	 to	 stand	 someone	 simply	 because	 he
was	bald,	it’s	going	a	little	grayer.
In	the	photograph	your	sister	in	Budapest	looks	somewhat	tired	and
sad,	don’t	you	think?	Was	she	married	then?	She	strikes	me	as	more
like	your	sister	in	Dresden	than	like	you.
I	haven’t	the	heart	to	write	the	diary	after	all,	Felice.	(Again	my	pen
won’t	 let	me	write	 “Fe”;	 it’s	 all	 right	 for	highschool	girls,	 for	 casual
contacts;	Felice	means	more,	it	is	almost	like	a	proper	embrace,	and	I
who	depend	on	words,	in	this	particular	case	as	well	as	by	my	nature,
cannot	afford	to	miss	such	an	opportunity.)	Inevitably	it	would	be	full
of	unbearable	things,	quite	impossible	things,	and	would	you	really	be
capable,	dearest,	of	reading	the	pages	simply	as	a	diary,	and	not	as	a
letter?	I	would	have	to	have	this	assurance	in	advance.



This	 afternoon	 I	 wrote	 as	 though	 the	 trip	 to	 Berlin	 depended
entirely	on	me;	that	was	due	solely	to	the	haste	in	which	I	wrote	the
letter;	needless	to	say,	the	trip	depends	above	all	on	the	view	you	take
of	it.
Farewell,	 dearest,	 I’ll	 write	 tomorrow	 during	 the	 day	 about	 the
obstacle	to	my	journey.

Franz

Have	 you	 read	 the	 things	 by	 Felix	 and	 Oskar?69	 I	 don’t	 know
“Monte	 Carlo”;70	 Max	 doesn’t	 want	 me	 to	 see	 it,	 because	 the
editors	have	made	too	many	changes.	There	will	be	something	by
Max	about	the	Austrian	Family71	in	the	Easter	issue.

March	18,	1913
Strictly	speaking	 the	obstacle	 to	my	 journey	still	exists	and	I’m	afraid
will	continue	to	exist;	but	it	has	lost	its	significance	as	an	obstacle;	so,
as	far	as	that	goes,	I	could	come.	I	just	wanted	to	tell	you	this	in	haste,
dearest.	No	letter!	(Don’t	mistake	this	for	an	entreaty,	it’s	only	a	sigh.)

Franz

March	19,	1913
I	don’t	know,	dearest,	I	have	a	mass	of	work	to	do,	my	desk	is	piled
high,	yet	I	can’t	do	anything.	Just	as	well	I	didn’t	make	the	decision	to
go	to	Berlin	any	sooner.	My	breath	failed	when	I	read	your	letter,	and
for	 some	 time	 after.	 True,	 it	 is	 only	 my	 weakness	 exploiting	 every
possible	opportunity	to	spread	itself	throughout	my	entire	being,	but
this	opportunity	is	really	too	great.	How	am	I	going	to	spend	the	few
remaining	days!	Even	last	night—and	by	then	I	hadn’t	even	had	your
reply—I	 could	 not	 write,	 but	 I	 cannot	 talk	 either,	 nor	 even	 listen,
except	to	topics	concerning	Easter.
And	 yet	 there	 would	 be	 a	 perfect	 way	 of	 stifling	 all	 joy	 and
expectation;	 I	 would	 only	 have	 to	 make	 clear	 to	 myself	 why	 I	 am
going.	 I	 believe	 I	 have	 not	made	 a	 secret	 of	 it,	 either	 to	 you,	 or	 to
myself;	it	is	just	that	I	am	unable	to	think	it	out	to	its	conclusion,	well
aware	of	it	as	I	am.	And	this	very	inability	is	actually	my	saving.	I	am
going	 to	Berlin	 for	 no	 other	 reason	 than	 to	 tell	 and	 show	you—you
who	have	been	misled	by	my	letters—who	I	really	am.	Shall	I	be	able



to	 make	 it	 clearer	 in	 person	 than	 I	 could	 in	 writing?	 In	 writing	 I
failed,	because	I	thwarted	my	purpose,	consciously	and	unconsciously;
but	when	I	am	actually	there,	little	can	be	concealed,	even	if	I	made
an	effort	to	do	so.	Presence	is	irrefutable.
Where	can	I	meet	you	then	on	Sunday	morning?	However,	should	I
still	be	prevented	from	coming,	I	would	send	a	telegram	on	Saturday
at	the	latest.	Are	you	at	the	office	all	day	Saturday?
I	started	this	letter	so	happily,	then	the	inevitable	second	paragraph
queered	my	pitch	and	brought	me	to	my	senses.

Franz

Do	you	know	the	correspondence	between	Elizabeth	Barrett	and
Robert	Browning?72

[LETTERHEAD:	Workers’	Accident	Insurance	Institute]
March	20,	1913

No	letter,	and	such	longing	for	you,	and	in	addition	to	the	old	threats,
newly	 emerging	 further	 threats	 of	 possible	 obstacles	 to	 my	 short
journey.	Now	at	Easter	there	are	usually—I	hadn’t	thought	of	it	before
—meetings	 of	 all	 kinds	 of	 societies	 to	 discuss	 accident	 insurance,
where	representatives	of	the	Institute	speak	on	some	subject	or	other,
or	have	at	 least	 to	be	present	at	 the	debates.	And	 in	 fact	 today	 two
such	invitations	arrived.	The	Federation	of	Czech	Milling	Associations
holds	 its	 convention	 in	 Prague	 on	 Monday,	 and	 the	 Czech	 builders
from	 the	Sudetenland	have	 theirs	 in	Brünn	on	Tuesday.	Luckily,	 the
meetings	are	 in	Czech,	and	my	Czech	 is	at	best	deplorable,	but	very
serious	 suggestions	 have	 been	made	 to	me,	 and	 in	 accordance	with
the	distribution	of	work	within	the	Institute,	it	would	undoubtedly	be
my	concern;	and	during	the	holidays	there	is	no	great	choice	among
those	who	could	be	sent	to	these	meetings.	But	I	must,	I	simply	must
see	you,	as	much	for	your	sake	as	 for	mine	(though	in	each	case	for
different	 reasons).	How	 I	 needed	 you	 last	 night!	 Every	 stair	was	 an
effort,	 because	 climbing	 them	 had	 no	 connection	 with	 my	 trip	 to
Berlin.

Franz

March	21,	1913



You	haven’t	written	to	me?	There	was	nothing	at	the	office	(this	is	an
ordinary	working	day73	here,	 that’s	why	I	am	also	sending	my	letter
to	your	office),	and	nothing	at	home,	either.	Felice!	And	besides	 it’s
not	yet	at	all	certain	that	I’ll	come;	it	won’t	be	decided	until	tomorrow
morning,	the	Millers’	convention	is	still	threatening.	And	if	there	is	no
letter	 tomorrow	 I	won’t	 know	where	 to	meet	 you.	 If	 I	 come,	 I	 shall
most	probably	stay	at	the	Askanische	Hof,	Königgrätzerstrasse.	I	heard
yesterday	that	Pick	is	going	to	Berlin	at	the	same	time.	It	won’t	affect
the	purpose	of	my	journey;	it	will	be	pleasant	to	travel	with	Pick,	and
once	in	Berlin	he	is	not	to	bother	me,	although	and	because	he	knows,
and	is	going	to	see,	half	the	Berlin	literary	world.	But	when	shall	I	see
you—you,	Felice,	and	where?	Will	it	be	possible	on	Sunday	morning?
But	before	appearing	before	you	I	must	have	a	proper	sleep.	How	little
sleep	I	have	had	again	this	week!	Much	of	my	neurasthenia	and	much
of	my	gray	hair	are	due	to	too	little	sleep.	If	only	I	have	had	enough
sleep	when	I	meet	you!	So	long	as	my	knees	don’t	shake!	Supposing	I
were	 to	 appear	 in	 the	 state	 I	 am	 in	 at	 present!—But	 it	 is	 extremely
silly	to	soliloquize	like	this	and	rob	oneself	of	the	little	composure	one
might	 be	 able	 to	muster.	Well,	 Felice,	 for	 the	 time	 being	 the	 letter
writers	 take	 leave	of	each	other,	and	the	 two	who	saw	each	other	6
months	 ago	will	 be	 seeing	 each	other	 again.	 Put	 up	with	 the	 actual
man	as	you	have	with	the	letter	writer,	no	more!	(This	is	the	advice	of
one	who	loves	you	very	much.)

Franz

Whether	I	am	in	Berlin	or	not,	you	will	get	a	 letter	 from	me	on
Sunday,	 or	 rather	 your	 mother	 will	 get	 it.—Now	 that	 I	 have
written	 this,	 it	 seems	 like	an	ugly	 fraud,	but	 the	presentation	of
the	real	man	is	about	to	begin.

[LETTER.	POSTMARK:	Prague,	March	22,	1913]

Still	undecided.
Franz

[LETTERHEAD:	Hotel	Askanische	Hof,	Berlin]
[March	23,	1913]



But	 what	 has	 happened,	 Felice?	 You	must	 surely	 have	 received	my
express	letter	on	Friday	in	which	I	announced	my	arrival	on	Saturday
night.	Surely	this	particular	 letter	can’t	have	gone	astray.	And	now	I
am	in	Berlin,	and	will	have	to	leave	again	this	afternoon	at	4	or	5;	the
hours	 are	 passing,	 and	 no	word	 from	 you.	 Please	 send	 your	 answer
with	 the	 boy.74	 Or	 if	 you	 can	 manage	 it	 unobtrusively,	 you	 could
telephone	to	make	sure;	I	am	sitting	at	the	Askanische	Hof—waiting.

Franz

[PICTURE	POSTCARD,	POSTMARK:	Leipzig,	March	25,	1913]

In	Leipzig	prior	to	departure.	Best	wishes.
Franz

[FOLLOWED	 BY	 THE	 SIGNATURES	 OF	 FRANZ	 WERFEL,	 YITZHAK	 LÖWY,	 OTTO	 PICK,	 AND	 FRANTIŠEK
KHOL75]

[PICTURE	POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Dresden,	March	25,	1913]

At	 the	 railway	 station	 in	 Dresden.	 Best	 wishes,	 from	 where	 don’t	 I
send	them?

F.
March	26,	1913

Dearest,	many,	many	thanks,	I	really	am	in	need	of	comfort,	the	kind
that	 springs	 from	that	dear,	 superhumanly	kind	heart	of	yours.	 I	am
writing	 no	 more	 than	 these	 few	 words	 today;	 I	 am	 almost	 beside
myself	with	sleepiness,	exhaustion,	and	anxiety,	and	still	have	a	great
stack	of	files	to	go	through	for	tomorrow’s	proceedings	in	Aussig.	And
sleep,	 I	 simply	 have	 to	 sleep,	 I	 have	 to	 get	 up	 at	 4:30	 tomorrow
morning.	 And	 if	 I	 still	 haven’t	 started	 my	 confession—which	 needs
courage,	hence	peace—by	tomorrow,	I	shall	certainly	start	it	the	day
after.
Do	 you	 know	 that	 now,	 since	 my	 return,	 you	 seem	 even	 more
incomprehensibly	miraculous	than	ever?

Franz



[PICTURE	POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Aussig,	March	27,	1913]

To	start	the	day	in	Aussig	with	something	worth	while,	and	to	secure
a	guardian	for	my	work:	Good	morning,	kindest	regards,	and	thanks,
nothing	but	thanks.

F.

[PICTURE	POSTCARD]
March	27,	1913

All	successfully	concluded,	but	one	is	tired,	and	there	is	twitching	in
the	head.	Have	just	been	reading	a	few	words	spoken	in	delirium	by
Goethe	around	10	o’clock	on	 the	day	of	his	death	 (he	died	at	11:30
A.M.	on	March	22,	1832),	and	can’t	get	them	out	of	my	mind:	“Do	you
see	the	beautiful	female	head	with	curls	magnificently	colored?”76

[ON	 THE	 UPPER	 HALF	 OF	 THE	 PICTURE]	 From	 sleepiness	 and	 too	 much
concentration	 I	have	been	 looking	at	 this	postcard	 for	a	 long	 time
before	sending	it	off	to	Berlin,	now	only	6	hours	distant,	as	opposed
to	the	usual	8.

F.
[LETTERHEAD:	Workers’	Accident	Insurance	Institute]

March	28,	1913
Dearest	Felice,	please	don’t	be	angry	with	me	 for	writing	so	 little;	 it
doesn’t	mean	I	have	not	much	time	for	you;	on	the	contrary,	since	I
left	 Berlin	 there	 have	 been	 few	 moments	 when	 I	 have	 not	 been
entirely,	and	fundamentally	and	all-comprisingly,	yours.	It	is	just	that
I	 was	 in	 Aussig	 yesterday,	 got	 home	 late,	 and	 then,	 from	 sheer
exhaustion,	sat	literally	like	a	puppet	at	the	table.	I	have	experienced
terrible	states	of	exhaustion.	What	I	bore	on	my	body	was	no	longer	a
human	head.	The	night	of	Wednesday	to	Thursday,	i.e.,	before	my	trip
to	Aussig,	I	did	not	get	to	bed	until	11:30,	as	I	had	to	study	the	files,
but	could	not	get	to	sleep	despite	my	great	weariness;	I	still	heard	1
o’clock	strike,	and	yet	had	to	be	up	again	by	4:30.	The	window	was
open,	 and	 in	 the	whirl	 of	my	 thoughts	 I	 jumped	out	 of	 the	window
continuously	 for	 whole	 quarter-hours,	 then	 trains	 came,	 one	 after



another	they	ran	over	my	body,	outstretched	on	the	tracks,	deepening
and	widening	the	two	cuts	in	my	neck	and	legs.	But	why	am	I	writing
all	 this?	 Simply	 to	 draw	 you	 toward	 me	 once	 again	 by	 means	 of
compassion,	and	savor	once	more	 its	 joys,	before	the	real	confession
destroys	it	all.
How	 close	 I	 came	 to	 you	 by	 my	 visit	 to	 Berlin!	 I	 breathe	 only
through	you.	But	you	do	not	know	me	well	enough,	you	dearest	and
best	 one,	 though	 it	 is	 incomprehensible	 to	me	 how	 you	 could	 have
closed	your	eyes	to	the	things	that	were	happening	right	next	to	you.
Only	 out	 of	 kindness?	 And	 if	 that’s	 possible,	 can’t	 everything	 be
possible?	But	I	shall	write	in	greater	detail	about	all	this.

Franz

There	was	no	letter	today,	it	may	be	at	home.	My	impatience	to
know	is	one	of	the	reasons	for	stopping.
Could	you	tell	me,	Felice,	how	the	impressions	made	upon	you,
first	by	my	letter[s],	and	then	by	my	presence,	compare?

March	28,	1913
I	won’t	complain	any	more,	the	7	weeks—or	will	it	only	be	6,	there	is
no	calendar	at	hand—are	both	too	short	and	too	long;	too	short	to	say
it	all,	too	short	to	relish	to	the	full	my	belief	that	your	attitude	toward
me	 is	not	 changing	 (as	you	 say,	 you	don’t	want	 to	give	me	a	direct
answer	to	the	confessions	I	have	to	make),	but	at	the	same	time	they
are	 almost	 too	 long	 to	be	 lived	 through.	 I	 look	 for	 you	 everywhere;
small	gestures	made	by	all	kinds	of	people	in	the	street	remind	me	of
you,	by	their	similarity	as	much	as	by	their	differences,	but	I	cannot
say	what	is	obsessing	me;	it	obsesses	me	utterly	and	leaves	no	strength
to	express	it.
I	gazed	at	you	too	long	in	real	life	(for	this	purpose	at	least,	I	made
good	 use	 of	my	 time)	 for	 your	 photographs	 to	 be	 of	 any	 use	 to	me
now.	I	don’t	want	to	look	at	them.	In	the	photographs	you	are	smooth,
and	 nearer	 to	 the	 commonplace,	 whereas	 I	 have	 beheld	 the	 true,
human,	inevitably	imperfect	face,	and	lost	myself	in	it.	How	can	I	find
my	way	out	of	it	again,	and	be	content	with	mere	photographs!
It	is	only	for	the	nonarrival	of	news	that	I’ve	kept	my	old	sensitivity.
I	 lack	all	confidence.	I	have	it	only	when	I	write	well,	otherwise	the
world	 goes	 its	 inexorable	 way	 against	 me.	 I	 always	 consider	 every
possible	reason	for	the	nonarrival	of	your	letters,	and	I	think	it	over	a



hundred	 times,	 much	 as	 one	 searches	 desperately	 the	 same	 place	 a
hundred	times	over	when	looking	for	some	object.	Could	it	not	be	that
something	 serious	 has	 actually	 happened	 to	 you,	 and	 that	 thus	 in
actual	 fact	 something	 terrible	 has	 befallen	me	 while	 I	 am	 dragging
myself	aimlessly	around?—I	turn	these	thoughts	over	in	my	mind	all
day	long,	slowly	but	incessantly.
If,	 as	 from	 tomorrow,	 dearest,	 I	 send	 diarylike	 reports,	 don’t	 look
upon	 them	 as	 a	 farce.	 They	 will	 include	 things	 I	 really	 could	 not
formulate	 in	 any	 other	 way	 if	 I	 were	 saying	 them	 to	myself	 alone,
though	be	 it	 in	your	dear	and	peaceful	presence.	Naturally,	 I	cannot
forget	 about	 you	 when	 I	 am	 writing	 to	 you,	 since	 I	 cannot	 forget
about	you	at	any	other	time,	either;	but	in	a	way	I	don’t	want	to	rouse
myself	out	of	my	fuddled	state—the	only	state	that	would	permit	me
to	write	 about	 these	 things—by	 invoking	 your	 name.	 Please,	 Felice,
bear	with	patience	everything	you	are	going	to	hear;	just	now	I	cannot
write;	I	shall	have	to	say	everything	quite	brutally;	a	few	days	ago	you
said	you	would	take	the	responsibility	for	everything;	and	that	would
be	a	great	deal	more	than	listening	patiently.	I	shall	try	to	put	down
everything	 except	 that	which	would	 shame	 even	me	 to	write.—And
now,	dearest,	 farewell,	may	God	keep	you!	Now	that	I	have	a	vague
idea	 of	 Berlin,	 please	 refer	 by	 name	 to	 all	 alleys‖	 and	 places	where
you’ve	been.

Yours

March	30,	1913
I	still	haven’t	started,	I	am	too	apprehensive,	I	love	you	too	much.	You
say	I	had	become	indispensable	to	you?	Pray	God	that	this	is	true,	my
whole	 being	 cries	 out,	 and	 am	 I	 to	 smother	 that	 cry	 with	my	 own
hand?
Today	my	entire	sleep	was	permeated	in	every	possible	way	by	the
thought	that	I	won’t	be	getting	a	letter	today.	Nor	did.	I,	and	I	could
feel	 it	 in	my	 throat	 before	 I	 understood	 the	maid’s	words.	 I	 should
exempt	 you	 from	writing	 letters?	 Dearest,	 that	would	 not	 be	much.
But	to	free	you	of	me,	now	that	would	not	be	a	bad	achievement.	But
then	 I	 simply	 cannot	 do	without	 your	 letters.	 I	 am	 obsessed	 by	 the
need	 for	 news	 of	 you.	 It	 is	 only	 through	 your	 letters	 that	 I	 become
capable	of	even	the	most	insignificant	daily	task.	I	need	your	letter	to
move	my	little	finger	properly.



And	how	could	I	possibly	do	without	news	when	I	hear	that	you	are
not	well,	that	you	are	still	coughing,	that	you	feel	all	in.	If	only	things
could	 be	 as	 they	 were	 in	 the	 days	 when	 everything	 inside	 me	 felt
relaxed	and	I	was	able	to	write	properly!	In	those	days,	when	writing
letters,	 I	 felt	 closer	 to	 you	 than	 at	 other	 times;	 today,	 if	 it	 were
possible,	I	would	never	leave	my	desk	at	all,	for	fear	of	losing	a	single
moment	of	 this	 being	 together.	 Sometimes,	 in	desperation,	 if	 there’s
no	 alternative,	 I	 manage	 to	 console	 myself	 with	 these	 unfounded
hopes.	At	the	office,	for	example,	when	I	have	received	no	letter	even
by	the	second	mail,	and	am	at	a	loss	to	know	what	to	do,	and	lack	the
powers	of	decision	for	even	the	simplest	of	dictations,	and	the	entire
field	of	accident	insurance,	however	tenuously	it	may	have	been	fixed
in	 my	 head,	 has	 now	 left	 me	 completely,	 and	 any	 little	 temporary
clerk	 knows	 more	 and	 is	 better	 fitted	 for	 the	 job	 than	 I,	 then	 I
sometimes	say	to	myself:	“Don’t	be	sad,	you	will	write	to	her	all	the
more	 this	 afternoon,	 which	 will	 give	 you	 all	 the	 more	 time	 to	 feel
really	close	to	her.	After	all,	it	is	entirely	in	your	own	hands.”	But	this,
alas,	is	utterly	false.	I	am	far	closer	to	you	when	I	don’t	write	to	you,
when	I	am	out	in	the	street,	and	everywhere	and	incessantly	there	is
something	to	remind	me	of	you;	when	alone	or	among	people	I	press
your	 letter	 to	 my	 cheek	 and	 inhale	 its	 fragrance,	 which	 is	 the
fragrance	of	your	throat—it	is	then	you	are	more	firmly	in	my	heart
than	 ever.	 Oh	 God,	 it	 is	 even	 worse,	 and	 it	 is	 the	 hand	 of	 my
misfortune	groping	its	way	to	the	depths:	On	the	telephone	from	the
Askanische	Hof	 I	 was	 closer	 to	 you,	 felt	 the	 happiness	 of	 our	 bond
with	greater	intensity	than	earlier	on,	when	sitting	on	the	tree	trunk
in	 Grunewald.	 Dearest!	 Dearest!	 Dearest!	 Compared	 to	 that,	 how
miserable	is	the	name

Franz!

March	31,	1913
It’s	already	late,	I	am	going	to	bed;	to	greet	you	with	a	few	strokes	of
the	pen	is	all	I	want,	dearest,	inconceivably	loved	one.—I	have	found
that	I	haven’t	had	enough	sleep	for	years,	and	shall	only	get	the	better
of	 this	everlasting	 tension	 in	my	head	either	 through	sleep	or	not	at
all.	I	went	for	a	long	walk	all	alone	with	your	last	letter;	I	could	have
gone	with	either	of	two	groups	of	people,	but	wanted	to	be	alone;	in
the	 past	 I	 wanted	 to	 be	 alone	 for	 reasons	 of	 coquetry,	 stupidity,



laziness,	 and	 used	 to	 wander	 about	 alone	 and	 bored,	 a	 reasonably
lively	and	healthy	young	man;	today	I	am	alone	from	necessity	and	in
no	small	measure	from	my	yearning	for	you.	I	left	the	city	far	behind,
dozed	awhile	on	a	sunny	slope,	crossed	the	Moldau	twice,	read	your
letter	several	 times,	 tossed	stones	down	from	a	height,	enjoyed	wide
vistas	 such	 as	 can	 be	 seen	 only	 in	 early	 spring,	 disturbed	 loving
couples	 (he	 lying	 in	 the	 grass,	 she	moving	up	 and	down	 in	 front	 of
him)—none	of	 this	counted,	 the	only	 thing	alive	about	me	was	your
letter	in	my	pocket.
If	only	you	keep	well,	dearest—I	am	so	worried.	Your	request	to	be
exempted	from	letter-writing	makes	me	suspect	that	you	are	not	going
to	 the	 office.	 Could	 this	 be	 true?	 Keep	 well,	 dearest,	 I	 shall	 never
complain	again,	as	long	as	you	keep	well.	And	don’t	go	to	bed	so	late;
you	looked	well,	had	rosy	cheeks,	were	lively,	and	yet	one	could	see
that	 you	 don’t	 get	 enough	 sleep.	Dearest,	 let	 us	 promise	 each	 other
until	Whitsun	always	 to	go	 to	bed	at	9.	Actually	 it	 is	now	9:30,	but
that	 is	 not	 really	 too	 late,	 and	 I	 feel	 fortified	 by	 the	 letter.	 Well,
goodnight,	dearest,	let	us	always	say	goodnight,	one	to	the	other,	at	9
o’clock.

Franz

April	1,	1913
My	one	fear—surely	nothing	worse	can	either	be	said	or	listened	to—
is	 that	 I	 shall	 never	 be	 able	 to	 possess	 you.	 At	 best	 I	 would	 be
confined,	 like	 an	 unthinkingly	 faithful	 dog,	 to	 kissing	 your	 casually
proffered	hand,	which	would	not	be	a	sign	of	love,	but	of	the	despair
of	the	animal	condemned	to	silence	and	eternal	separation.	I	would	sit
beside	you	and,	as	has	happened,	feel	the	breath	and	life	of	your	body
at	my	side,	yet	 in	 reality	be	 further	 from	you	 than	now,	here	 in	my
room.	I	would	never	be	able	to	attract	your	attention,	and	it	would	be
lost	 to	me	altogether	when	you	 look	out	of	 the	window,	or	 lay	your
head	in	your	hands.	You	and	I	would	ride	past	the	entire	world,	hand
in	 hand,	 seemingly	 united,	 and	 none	 of	 it	 would	 be	 true.	 In	 short,
though	you	might	lean	toward	me	far	enough	for	you	to	be	in	danger,
I	would	be	excluded	from	you	forever.78
If	this	be	true,	Felice—and	to	me	there	seems	to	be	no	doubt—then
surely	I	had	good	reason	to	want	with	all	my	might	to	part	from	you
six	months	ago,	and	moreover	good	reason	 to	 fear	any	conventional



bond	with	you,	 since	 the	consequences	of	any	such	bond	could	only
be	 the	 severing	of	my	desire	 from	 the	 feeble	 forces	 that	 still	 sustain
me—who	am	unfit	for	this	earth—on	this	earth	today.
I	am	stopping,	Felice,	I	have	written	enough	for	today.

Franz

I	 was	 about	 to	 get	 undressed	 when	 my	 mother	 came	 in	 on	 some
trifling	 errand,	 and	 on	 her	 way	 out	 offered	 to	 kiss	 me	 goodnight,
which	hasn’t	happened	for	many	years.	“That’s	good,”	I	said.	“I	never
dared,”	 said	my	mother,	 “I	 thought	you	didn’t	 like	 it.	But	 if	 you	do
like	it,	I	like	it	very	much,	too.”

[LETTERHEAD:	Workers’	Accident	Insurance	Institute]
April	2,	1913

I,	dearest,	become	estranged?	I	who	die	of	longing	for	you	here	at	my
desk?	While	washing	my	hands	outside	 in	 the	dark	passage	 today,	 I
was	 somehow	so	overcome	by	 the	 thought	of	you	 that	 I	had	 to	 step
across	to	the	window	to	seek	some	comfort,	if	only	from	the	gray	sky.
This	is	how	I	live.

Franz

April	4,	1913
[Presumably	during	the	night	of	April	3–4,	1913]

It	 could	 easily	 be	mere	 chance,	 Felice,	 that	 I	 have	 no	 news	 of	 you
today,	since	you	moved	house79	yesterday	and	probably	didn’t	have	a
moment	to	spare.	On	the	other	hand	it	doesn’t	seem	like	mere	chance;
perhaps	it	indicates	a	necessary	measure	forever.	Perhaps	I	shall	never
get	 another	 letter.a	 But	 surely	 I	 can	 indulge	my	need	 for	writing	 to
you,	which	has	its	roots	in	the	very	center	of	my	existence,	until	my
letters	are	returned	unopened.	If	only	you	could	see	the	creature	who
writes	to	you,	and	the	deranged	condition	of	his	brain!

Franz

April	4,	1913
For	the	past	month	or	two	a	Czech	writer	has	been	living	next	door	to



us.	 He	 is	 a	 teacher	 and	 author	 of	 erotic	 novels,	 at	 least	 this	 is	 the
subtitle	 of	 his	 most	 recent	 book,	 and	 on	 the	 title	 page	 there	 is	 a
picture	of	a	lady	juggling	with	burning	hearts.	I	think	Burning	Hearts	is
also	the	title	of	the	book.	I	don’t	really	know	why	I	always	picture	this
man,	without	concerning	myself	with	him	in	any	way,	as	a	little	black
creep.	And	then,	 the	other	day,	 I	heard	a	Czech	novelist	make	some
remark	about	our	neighbor	that	was	by	no	means	contrary	to	my	idea
of	him.	He	said	that	erotic	novels	written	by	a	dried-up	little	teacher
with	no	experience	of	the	world	and	from	his	little	hole	in	the	ground
are	bound	to	be	somewhat	ridiculous.	Just	now	in	the	elevator	I	met
him	face	to	face	for	the	first	time.	What	a	magnificent,	enviable	man!
The	Czechs,	you	know,	are	very	much	inclined	to	emulate	the	French;
and	 although	 this	 tendency	 usually	 lags	 behind	 and	 adopts	 the
outmoded	ways	of	the	beloved	country	(for	only	experience	that	has
already	 been	 digested	 is	 accessible	 to	 the	 alien),	 this	 fact	 is	 least
injurious	 to	 the	 imitators	 of	 the	 French,	 for	 France	 is	 based	 on
tradition;	all	progress	there	is	very	gradual,	proceeding	on	its	course
while	 discarding	 virtually	 nothing,	 so	 that	 the	 imitator	 can	 almost
keep	pace	without	exerting	himself,	or	at	least	he	manages	to	remain
lovable.	And	there	is	this	man	with	his	natty	little	French	goatee,	and
a	 slouch	hat	 straight	 from	Montmartre,	 and	a	 flowing	overcoat	over
his	arm,	and	pleasant,	engaging	movements,	a	lively	expression—he	is
a	pleasure	to	behold.80
And	here	I	am,	back	again	with	myself,	Felice,	dearest	Felice,	here	I
am,	attempting	 to	 string	along	on	 little	 stories	 such	as	 this.	Dearest,
I’ve	got	your	telegram;	at	first	it	seemed	to	be	worded	in	some	secret
code.	You	received	my	letter	on	Thursday,	yet	you	send	such	a	nice,
sweet,	 calm	 telegram	 that	 with	 all	 my	might	 I	 have	 to	 stop	myself
believing	the	words,	and	allow	myself	 to	be	calmed,	especially	since
Max,	in	other	but	nevertheless	similar	respects,	also	tried	to	calm	me
this	evening,	and	 for	 the	 time	being	almost	 succeeded.	Dearest,	 that
letter	 you	 got	 on	Thursday	 is	 utterly	 sincere	 in	what	 it	 says.	At	 the
moment	 I	 am	 so	 addled	 that	 I	myself	 could	 almost	mistrust	 it,	 and
ironically	it	seems	to	me	untrustworthy.	But	no,	dearest,	dearest,	it	is
the	 truth;	 these	 are	 not	 fantasies	 but	 facts.	 This	 is	 the	 way	 it	 is,
precisely.

Franz

[IN	THE	LOWER	MARGIN]	And	with	all	this	I	 forget	to	wish	you	luck	in	your



new	apartment.

April	4,	1913
[Presumably	during	the	night	of	April	4–5,	1913]

The	night	 before	 last,	 or	 the	 one	before	 that,	 I	 dreamed	 continually
about	 teeth;	 they	were	 not	 orderly	 teeth	 in	 a	mouth,	 but	 a	mass	 of
teeth	 fitted	 together,	 exactly	as	 in	children’s	 jigsaw	puzzles,	 and	 the
whole	lot,	guided	by	my	jaw,	were	in	some	kind	of	sliding	motion.	I
mustered	all	my	strength	to	express	something	which,	above	all	else,
was	 very	 close	 to	my	 heart;	 the	movement	 of	 these	 teeth,	 the	 gaps
between	 them,	 their	grinding,	 the	 sensation	when	guiding	 them—all
this	was	in	some	way	closely	related	to	some	thought,	some	decision,
a	 hope,	 a	 possibility,	 which	 I	 was	 trying	 to	 grasp,	 hold	 on	 to,	 and
realize,	 by	means	 of	 this	 continual	 biting.	 I	 made	 a	 great	 effort,	 at
times	it	seemed	possible,	at	times	I	thought	I	was	well	on	the	way	to
success,	and	in	the	morning,	when	I	was	finally	to	wake	up,	with	my
eyes	half-open,	 it	 seemed	as	 though	 everything	had	been	 successful,
the	 long	 night’s	 labor	 had	 not	 been	 in	 vain,	 the	 final	 unalterable
disposition	of	teeth	had	an	undoubtedly	auspicious	significance,	and	it
seemed	 incomprehensible	 that	 I	 had	 not	 recognized	 this	 during	 the
night,	 and	 had	 been	 so	 desperate,	 indeed	 had	 even	 thought	 vivid
dreams	 to	 be	 detrimental	 to	 sleep.	 But	 then	 I	was	 fully	 awake	 (our
governess	keeps	exclaiming	how	late	it	is	in	her	moaning,	reproachful
voice),	and	so	after	all	nothing	had	been	achieved,	the	misery	of	the
office	 was	 about	 to	 begin	 again,	 and	 you,	 dearest,	 though	 I	 didn’t
know	it	at	the	time,	had	spent	the	night	with	toothache.
Do	you	know,	dearest,	this	mixture	of	happiness	and	unhappiness	of
which	 my	 relationship	 with	 you	 consists	 (happiness—because	 you
have	not	yet	forsaken	me,	and	should	you	forsake	me,	you	have	liked
me	once;	unhappiness—because	 I	am	failing	so	miserably	 in	 the	 test
of	my	worth,	 this	 test	 that	 you	 personify	 for	me)	 sends	me	 chasing
around	 in	 circles	 as	 though	 I	 were	 the	 most	 useless	 being	 on	 this
earth.	Every	inhibition	that	has	so	far	held	me	back	(every	man	has	to
endure	tests,	 there	are	few	that	I	have	passed	successfully,	and	none
has	been	as	great	or	as	decisive	as	this	one)	seems	to	be	crumbling;	I
go	about	in	a	state	of	pointless	despair	and	rage,	not	so	much	against
my	environment,	against	my	destiny,	against	that	which	is	above	us,
but	only	and	passionately	against	myself,	against	myself	alone.	 I	am



probably	worst	off	at	the	office;	this	really	ghostly	activity	at	my	desk
closes	in	on	me;	I	accomplish	nothing;	sometimes	I	feel	like	throwing
myself	at	the	director’s	feet	and	begging	him	to	have	the	decency	not
to	 sack	 me.	 Of	 course,	 hardly	 anyone	 notices	 any	 of	 this.	 And
everything	may	be	better	as	 from	the	day	after	 tomorrow;	 I	 shall	be
working	with	a	gardener	 in	 the	afternoons;	 I	will	 tell	you	about	 this
shortly.

Franz

April	5,	1913
Yesterday,	 Felice,	 I	 received	 your	 letter	 unexpectedly;	 when	 I	 got
home	 at	 7	 o’clock	 in	 the	 evening	 the	 porter’s	wife	 handed	 it	 to	me
downstairs.	The	mailman	had	been	too	lazy	to	climb	to	the	4th	floor.
How	serene	and	sweet	your	letter	is!	As	though	a	guardian	angel	had
escorted	me	as	 far	as	this	ultimate	step—when	I	had	decided	to	say,
not	quite	everything,	but	most	things,	I	used	affected	and	ambiguous
words,	and	yet	expected	them	to	be	intelligible.	But	now	it	is	too	late
to	 go	 back,	 I	 really	 cannot	 treat	 this	 final	 step	 as	 a	 joke	 if	 it	 was
sincere	 and	 absolutely	 necessary.	 Besides,	 in	 the	 letter	 you	 received
yesterday	by	the	second	mail,	as	well	as	in	the	one	that	will	probably
reach	 you	 today,	 I	 said	 too	much;	 which	 is	 undoubtedly	 why	 I	 am
without	news	of	you	today.b
No,	Felice,	my	appearance	is	not	my	worst	attribute.	“If	only	it	were
Whitsun!”	This	wish	bursts	 forth	now	(now!)	 in	utter	madness,	now,
when	I	could	hardly	have	a	more	absurd	wish	than	just	that!	The	day
before	yesterday	I	walked	past	the	arrival	hall	at	the	railway	station.	I
was	 thinking	 of	 nothing	 in	 particular,	 and	 hardly	 noticed	 the	 few
porters	who	were	standing	around,	shabbily	dressed	family	men	who,
as	befits	 this	profession	 in	Prague,	were	wiping	 their	eyes,	yawning,
and	 spitting	all	over	 the	place.	Without	 immediately	being	aware	of
the	connection,	I	became	envious	of	them	(which	in	itself	would	not
have	been	 remarkable,	 since	 I	 envy	everybody,	and	 take	pleasure	 in
imagining	myself	 in	 everybody’s	 shoes);	 only	 later	 did	 I	 realize	 that
the	thought	of	you	contributed	to	my	envy,	that	probably	these	same
porters	had	stood	there	when	you	lowered	your	foot	from	the	station
threshold	onto	the	sidewalk	for	the	first	time,	that	they	were	watching
when	you	hired	the	cab,	paid	the	porter,	stepped	in,	and	disappeared.
To	go	running	after	your	cab	somewhere	in	the	rush	of	heavy	traffic



without	 losing	sight	of	 it	or	allowing	any	obstacle	to	 intervene—this
might	 be	 an	 undertaking	 I	 would	 be	 equal	 to.	 But	 what	 else?
Whatever	else?

Franz

By	the	enclosed	 letter,	you	can	see	what	a	charming	publisher	 I
have.	He	is	a	very	beautiful	man	of	about	25,	to	whom	God	has
given	a	beautiful	wife,	several	million	marks,	the	inclination	to	be
a	publisher,	and	a	certain	aptitude	for	the	publishing	business.

Enclosed:
Kurt	Wolff	to	Franz	Kafka
[LETTERHEAD:	Kurt	Wolff,	Publisher]

April	2,	1913
Dr.	Franz	Kafka
Prague
Nikolasstr.	36

Dear	Dr.	Kafka,
I	am	asking	you	herewith	most	cordially	and	urgently	to	send	me,	if
possible	at	once,	 the	 first	 chapter	 of	 your	 novel	which,	 according	 to
you	as	well	as	Dr.	Brod,	could	well	be	published	on	 its	own.	And	at
the	 same	 time	 please	 be	 good	 enough	 to	 send	 me	 a	 copy	 or	 the
manuscript	 of	 the	 bedbug	 story.	 On	 Sunday	 I	 am	 going	 abroad	 for
several	weeks	and	would	like	to	have	read	both	before	my	departure.
I	 would	 regard	 it	 as	 a	 great	 kindness	 on	 your	 part	 if	 you	 could
comply	with	my	wishes.
I	 hope	 we	 shall	 meet	 again	 before	 long	 and	 somewhat	 more
comfortably	than	the	other	day	in	Leipzig.

Yours	sincerely,	Kurt	Wolff81

April	7,	1913
Felice,	dearest,	at	 last	 I	have	got	down	to	 this	 letter;	 there	are	some
not	particularly	pleasant	guests	next	door;	for	the	past	hour	and	a	half
I	have	been	rushing	into	my	room	as	though	you	were	there.	Can	you
tell	by	my	handwriting	that	I	have	done	some	hard	labor	today,	and
that	my	pen-holder	has	become	too	light	a	thing	for	me?	Yes,	for	the



first	time	today	I	worked	with	the	gardener	out	in	Nusle,	a	suburb,	in
the	 cool	 rain,	 in	 nothing	 but	my	 shirt	 and	 trousers.	 It	 has	 done	me
good.	 And	 it	 was	 not	 so	 easy	 to	 find	 a	 job.	 Though	 there	 are	 any
number	of	vegetable	gardens	in	that	neighborhood,	they	are	all	open
without	fencing,	in	between	the	houses,	and	especially	in	the	evening
after	working	hours,	 hence	 just	when	 I	want	 to	work,	 there	 is	 a	 lot
going	 on	 around	 there—American	 swings,	 merry-go-rounds,	 music;
however	pretty	it	may	be,	I	don’t	like	it	much	as	a	place	to	work	in,
especially	since	what	is	grown	in	these	vegetable	gardens,	which	are
mostly	tiny	and	owned	by	poor	people,	is	limited,	and	so	one	cannot
learn	a	great	deal.	Not	that	I	really	want	to	learn	anything.	My	main
purpose	was	to	escape	self-torture	for	a	few	hours—in	contrast	to	my
ghostly	work	 at	 the	 office,	which	 virtually	 flies	 away	 from	me	 each
time	I	try	to	grasp	it	(real	hell	is	there	in	the	office,	no	other	can	hold	any
terror	for	me)—to	do	some	dull,	honest,	useful,	silent,	solitary,	healthy,
strenuous	work.	But	actually	these	reasons	are	not	strictly	honest,	for	I
do	not	consider	the	self-torture	I	constantly	practice	to	be	in	any	way
unnecessary;	on	 the	contrary,	 I	believe	 it	 to	be	extremely	necessary,
and	for	your	sake,	dearest,	it	would	be	a	blessing	if	this	torture	were
to	destroy	me.	But	I	longed	to	be	rid	of	the	torment	for	2	hours,	to	be
free	to	think	of	you	calmly	and	happily,	and	perhaps	in	the	end	even
earn	 for	 myself	 some	 rather	 sounder	 sleep	 for	 the	 night.	 But	 such
explanations	would	have	made	people	suspicious,	and	possibly	no	one
would	have	taken	me	on,	so	I	said	I	expected	shortly	to	have	a	garden
of	my	own,	and	therefore	wished	to	learn	something	about	gardening.
But	it’s	too	late,	Felice;	I’ll	tell	you	more	tomorrow;	train-fever	will
no	 doubt	make	 you	 sleep	 badly	 tonight,	 poor	 child,	 but	 all	 will	 be
well.	 Here	 is	 someone	 who	 has	 little	 in	 his	 head	 other	 than	 good
wishes	for	you.

Franz

April	8,	1913
You	 have	 had	 a	 tooth	 pulled	 and	 have	 been	 in	 pain	 again.	 Your
troubles	never	cease,	and	your	weariness	never	leaves	you,	and	yet	to
be	as	 fresh	as	 anyone	all	 you	need	 is	 complete	 rest.	 I	 am	always	 so
much	inclined	to	relate	to	myself	any	misfortune	that	may	befall	you,
and	to	blame	myself	for	it,	even	if	it	is	as	unreasonable	as	in	the	case
of	a	toothache.	Will	you	get	some	peace	and	quiet	in	Frankfurt?	And



have	the	Bluen	couple	gone	with	you?	And	Frl.	Brühl?	And	will	you
have	a	thorough	rest?	Don’t	read	in	bed	as	late	as	you	did	in	Prague!
Preferably	 read	 only	 poetry,	 not	 novels	 that	 keep	 you	 awake.
Tomorrow	I	will	send	you	Werfel’s	poems.	This	will	be	my	reward	to
Werfel,	he	deserves	it.	I	got	a	postcard	from	him	today	which,	though
he	has	the	reputation	of	being	negligent	and	lazy,	he	wrote	the	very
moment	he	received	my	letter,	and	in	which	he,	in	conjunction	with
two	others	who	have	 also	written	 to	me,	 offers	 to	do	 all	 he	 can	 for
Löwy,	who	is	at	a	very	low	ebb	once	again,	and	is	lying	in	the	hospital
with	 those	 terrible	 headaches	 he	 gets	 every	 3	months	 as	 a	 result	 of
some	old	nose	operation.	He	left	his	old	company	and	with	the	best	of
intentions,	 though	 against	 my	 advice,	 formed	 a	 new	 company	 that
was	to	have	been	better	than	the	old,	to	have	staged	better	plays.,	but
—as	 is	 inevitable	when	 people	 are	 rounded	 up	 at	 random	 and	 in	 a
hurry—turned	out	to	be	much	worse	than	the	old,	and	under	Löwy’s
childish	 management—he	 was	 perpetually	 traveling	 back	 and	 forth
with	 the	 company	 between	 Leipzig	 and	 Berlin,	 getting	 hardly	 any
sleep—also	 earned	 far	 less	 money.	 At	 this	 point	 it	 was	 about	 to
collapse:	what	with	the	damaging	effect	of	competition	from	the	old
and	better	company,	plus	the	company’s	ridiculously	high	debts	which
Löwy	had	taken	on	in	his	own	name	(what	did	his	creditors	imagine!).
All	hopes	for	the	future	faded.	Then,	as	if	this	weren’t	enough,	Löwy
fell	ill.	(“God	is	bountiful,”	he	wrote	to	me,	“when	He	gives,	He	gives
with	both	hands.”)	Needless	to	say,	the	company	dispersed	as	quickly
as	possible,	and	thus	he	was	left,	ill,	entirely	without	funds,	heavily	in
debt,	and	without	any	prospects	after	such	complete	failure.	But	this
is	 an	 old	 story;	 I	 really	 don’t	 know	why	 I	 haven’t	 told	 you	 about	 it
before;	I	have	had	a	great	many	letters	from	him.	Perhaps	he	will	now
follow	my	advice	and	go	to	Palestine.
Dearest,	I	should	close	now,	although	I	have	hardly	spoken	to	you
at	all.	In	my	mind	I	accompanied	you	this	morning	on	your	proposed
journey.	 Never	 mind;	 I	 went	 to	 Frankfurt	 for	 the	 second	 time	 this
afternoon.

Franz

April	8,	1913
So	you	are	 in	Frankfurt!	Dearest,	you	really	are	good	to	write	to	me
despite	 the	 pressure	 of	 all	 that	 work.	 If	 I	 attempted	 to	 express	 my



thanks	by	kissing	your	hand,	my	 lips	would	not	 leave	your	hand.—I
feel	 as	 though,	 as	 your	 train	 advances,	 my	 entire	 being	 is	 slowly
turning	away	from	Berlin,	and	toward	Frankfurt.	Think	how	interested
I	was	in	Oskar’s	last	trip	to	Berlin,	and	even	his	next	trip	still	gripped
my	heart	 so	 long	as	you	were	 in	Berlin,	even	 though	 I	knew	that	at
the	time	of	his	trip	you	would	no	longer	be	there.	However,	you	were
still	in	Berlin,	and	so	it	was	a	joy	to	talk	about	it.	But	when	I	went	to
see	Oskar	yesterday—he	read	some	 things	 to	me	 to	 test	 their	effects
for	Berlin—I	accepted	 it	all	as	partly	excellent	work,	but	my	 lack	of
interest	in	his	reading	in	that	uninteresting	Berlin	positively	tired	me.
Dearest!	Yes,	 I	will	 tell	you	about	my	mother	before	 long,	 I	am	now
writing	 in	great	haste.	Needless	 to	say,	 I	had	to	 tell	her	a	 little	 (you
would	 be	 amazed	 how	 terribly	 little)	 about	 Berlin,	 but	 the	 same
inhibition	that	kept	my	lips	sealed	in	Grunewald	kept	my	lips	sealed
in	Prague	as	well.
Farewell,	dearest,	 and	a	 lot	of	 luck	at	 the	exhibition,	 and	a	 lot	of

courage	in	your	hotel	room.
Franz

[POSTMARK:	April	10,	1913]
Before	going	to	bed.	Late	and	weary,	 I	am	also	very	confused	again;
dearest,	please	don’t	expect	to	hear	any	more	from	me	today.	You	are
happy	in	Frankfurt,	aren’t	you?	Oh	God,	to	think	that	I	let	you	travel
all	alone	through	the	world!

Franz

April	10,	1913
At	 last	 I	 know	 where	 you	 are,	 Felice.	 I	 venture	 to	 say	 “at	 last”
although	 I	was	without	 a	 letter	 for	 only	one	day,	 and	although	you
——	 But	 why	 repeat	 it	 all?	 You	 don’t	 resent	 this	 coercion	 I	 feel
obliged	 to	exercise,	 for	 surely	you	must	at	 any	 rate	 suspect	 that	 the
real	reason	for	my	longing	to	keep	up	an—if	possible	uninterrupted—
exchange	of	letters	is	not	love,	for	love	would	seek	to	spare	you	in	the
state	of	 lamentable	 tiredness	you	have	been	 in	of	 late,	but	 is	due	 to
my	unhappy	disposition.
Felice,	I	don’t	want	any	answers	to	my	letters;	I	want	to	hear	about

you,	only	about	you;	I	want	to	see	you	in	as	peaceful	a	frame	of	mind



as	if	I	didn’t	exist,	or	as	if	I	were	a	different	person;	indeed,	I	should
have	 to	 tremble	 at	 the	 thought	 that	 my	 letters	 might	 receive	 the
answers	they	deserve—but	tell	me	just	one	thing,	Felice,	so	that	I	may
see	 clearly	 from	where	 the	 decision	must	 ultimately	 come,	 tell	 me:
Did	you,	from	that	twisted,	affected,	feeble,	stupid	letter	you	got	last
Thursday,	 and	 to	which	 I	have	 referred	 several	 times	 since,	did	you
discover	 what	 it	 was	 all	 about?	 Actually	 I	 should	 not	 talk	 about
anything	else;	it	is	wonderful	to	enjoy	a	respite,	to	look	at	you	and	to
forget	about	oneself,	but	it	is	irresponsible.
I	hadn’t	realized	that	you	would	be	in	Hanover.	I	had	thought	you
were	going	there	after	Frankfurt;	if	I	am	not	mistaken	this	is	what	you
once	 wrote.	 And	 your	 sister	 is	 in	 Hanover?	 Suddenly?	 Are	 all	 her
troubles	over?	The	5	or	6	weeks	you	once	said	the	decision	depended
on	must	have	elapsed	by	now.	You	stayed	in	Hanover	with	your	sister,
not	at	a	hotel?
You	mustn’t	 expect	 any	 very	 salutary	 effects	 from	my	 gardening.
Today	 was	 my	 fourth	 day	 at	 work.	 Needless	 to	 say,	 the	 muscles
become	 somewhat	 taut,	 one’s	 whole	 body	 rather	 heavier	 and	 more
erect,	and	thus	self-confidence	increases	slightly.	Of	course,	it	cannot
be	 entirely	 without	 significance	 if	 a	 body	 lacking	 adequate	 natural
gifts,	leading	a	desk-and-sofa	life,	and	allowing	itself	continually	to	be
assailed	 and	 deeply	 moved,	 should	 for	 once	 with	 a	 spade	 become
itself	 the	 assailant	 and	 mover.	 But	 the	 limits	 of	 these	 effects	 can
already	be	seen;	I	shall	be	writing	more	about	this.	Today	it’s	already
late;	 I	 spent	 the	 evening	with	Max,	 and	 tarried	 too	 long	with	 those
two	 contented	 people.	 I	misjudged	 this	marriage	 to	 begin	with,	 but
the	reasons	for	my	error	are	only	too	obvious	to	me.

Franz

April	11,	1913
We	are	now	so	far	apart,	Felice,	that	I	didn’t	get	the	picture	postcard
you	seem	to	have	mailed	on	Wednesday	evening,	until	today,	Friday.	I
am	 aware	 of	 these	 distances	 (not	 just	 now,	 for	 I	 am	 completely
numbed	 by	 a	 bad	 story	 of	 Friedrich	Huch’s	 that	 I	 read	 in	 the	Neue
Rundschau,82	 but	 as	 a	 rule,	 for	 instance	 when	 I	 saw	 your	 postcard
lying	 on	 the	 table)—no,	 I	 am	 not	 going	 on;	 you	 see,	 this	 is	 how
sometimes	everything	collapses	over	my	head.	Actually,	I	only	wanted
to	tell	you	that	it	occurred	to	me	the	other	day	quite	by	chance	that	I



could	 easily	 be	 living	 in	 Vienna,	 and	 how	 terrible	 the	 distance
between	us	would	be	then,	how	in	Prague	it	is	only	just	bearable,	and
what	a	desolate	place	way	down	there	Vienna	is,	although	6	months
ago	it	was	closer	to	Prague	than	Berlin.
The	postcard	must	have	been	written	at	4	o’clock,	you	were	sitting
in	the	dining	car,	how	clearly	I	can	see	you,	I	can	give	a	description	of
where	you	were	 sitting:	 If	 this	was	 the	direction	 in	which	you	were
traveling	←,	 then,	 seen	 from	 that	direction,	 I	 imagine	you	 sitting	at
the	 last	or	 last	but	one	table	on	the	right	by	the	window,	 facing	the
engine.	 I	 could	 have	 drawn	 it,	 but	 then	 I	 should	 have	 had	 to	 leave
your	 seat	 empty,	 and	 I	didn’t	want	 to	do	 that.	 Should	you	maintain
that	you	sat	elsewhere,	I	won’t	believe	it.	However	I	have	just	noticed
that	 I	 certainly	 must	 have	 been	 wrong,	 for	 in	 my	 imagination	 I
visualized	the	entire	dining	car	completely	empty	except	for	you,	and
I	 have	 to	 force	myself	 to	 see	 the	waiter	who	hands	 you	 the	 picture
postcard.
By	the	way,	the	other	day	I	had	a	wildly	confused	dream	about	you,
and	Max	and	his	wife.	We	were	in	Berlin,	and	among	other	things	we
found	all	 the	Grunewald	 lakes,	which	you	couldn’t	even	show	me	in
reality,	right	in	the	middle	of	the	town,	one	behind	the	other.	Perhaps
I	was	alone	when	this	discovery	was	made,	I	probably	wanted	to	find
you,	almost	willfully	lost	my	way,	and	from	a	jetty	saw	some	kind	of
strange,	 grayish	 black,	 indefinable	 apparitions,	 asked	 a	 passerby	 for
information,	 and	 learned	 that	 these	 were	 the	 Grunewald	 lakes	 and
that,	though	right	in	the	middle	of	the	town,	I	was	nevertheless	a	very
long	way	from	you.	Then	we	were	also	in	Wannsee,	which	you	didn’t
like	(in	my	dream	your	actual	remark	kept	sounding	in	my	ears);	we
passed	through	a	wrought-iron	gate	as	into	a	park	or	a	cemetery,	and
had	many	 experiences,	 for	 the	 telling	 of	which	 it	 is	 now	 too	 late.	 I
should	 also	have	 to	delve	 too	deeply	 to	 remember	 them.	Goodnight
and	happier	dreams.

Franz

April	13,	1913
Felice,	you’ve	been	to	Frankfurt	since	Wednesday	afternoon,	and	only
today,	 Sunday	morning,	 do	 I	 hear	 of	 it	 from	your	 postcard.	 You	 do
understand,	Felice,	 that	 this	 is	not	 a	 reproach;	my	 ties	with	you	are
such	 that	 there	 is	 no	 room	 for	 reproaches;	 if	 only	 you	 would



understand	 the	other	 things	as	well.	 I	 sometimes	 think	 that	by	your
trip	to	Frankfurt,	by	the	absence	of	the	familiar	surroundings	in	which
you	received	my	first	letters,	from	the	opportunity	for	reflecting	more
clearly	upon	me,	by	reading	my	letters	in	Frankfurt,	a	more	profound
understanding	of	me	could	have	dawned	upon	you;	should	this	be	so,
you	would	have	every	reason	to	bless	this	trip	to	Frankfurt.	I	am	not
well;	 I	 could	 have	 built	 the	 Pyramids	with	 the	 effort	 it	 takes	me	 to
cling	on	to	life	and	reason.

Franz

April	14,	1913
[Presumably	during	the	night	of	April	13	to	14,	1913]

How	am	I	 to	write	 to	you,	Felice,	after	5	days	without	a	word	 from
you?	Well,	 let	me	 just	 send	 you	 good	wishes,	 and	with	 undisclosed
thoughts	in	my	mind,	hold	your	dear	hand	in	mine	for	a	little	while.
The	 greater	 part	 of	 Sunday	 I	 spent	 in	 bed,	 hardly	 sleeping	 at	 all,
which	 possibly,	 and	 in	 very	 exceptional	 circumstances,	 might	 be
permissible	to	a	young	man	of	17	as	a	protest	against	the	world.	And
while	lying	there,	every	cell	of	one’s	brain	becomes	impregnated	with
disgust!

Franz

[TELEGRAM,	SENT	FROM	PRAGUE,	April	14,	1913]

Felice	Bauer,	Frankfurt	am	Main,	Hotel	Monopol	Metropole	again
no	news	please	please	a	candid	word

9:15	P.M.	April	14,	1913
I	have	to	write	in	the	presence	of	my	card-playing	parents;	I	am	also
slightly	exhausted	by	the	usual	as	well	as	the	unusual	and	yet,	Felice
—very	happy.	“But	everything	is	as	it	was”	has	a	wonderful	ring	that
eclipses	 the	 severity	 that	 could	 be	 detected	 in	 “No	 unnecessary
worries,	please.”	I	had	reached	the	end	of	my	strength,	though	that	is
where	I	have	been	most	of	the	time	recently,	but	at	that	moment	I	was
almost	 over	 the	 edge.	 I	 had	 to	 say	 to	 myself—but	 why	 is	 my	 pen
overflowing?	 Is	everything	really	as	 it	was,	Felice,	 really	everything,



really	as	it	was?
You	 should	 actually	 be	 amazed;	 in	 my	 letters	 it	 is	 my	 perpetual
concern	 to	 free	 you	 of	 me,	 but	 when	 for	 once	 I	 seem	 to	 have
succeeded,	 I	 go	 raving	 mad.	 I	 could	 not	 understand	 why,	 from	 a
whole	week	 in	Frankfurt,	 only	one	postcard	 should	 reach	me;	 could
not	understand	how	you	could	have	so	 little	 time,	especially	when	 I
remember	how	once,	some	while	ago,	you	wrote	about	the	possibility
of	 our	meeting	 in	 Frankfurt,	 about	 plenty	 of	 free	 time,	 trips	 to	 the
Taunus,	etc.	Nevertheless	I	accepted	your	failure	to	write;	things	were
coming	 to	an	end	 the	way	 I	was	coming	 to	 the	end.	Then	yesterday
when	at	Max’s	and	about	to	leave,	something	was	said	quite	casually
among	other	things,	but	owing	to	some	faint	connection	it	brought	to
my	mind	the	thought	that	you	in	Frankfurt,	in	that	very	festival	hall
from	which	your	telegram	was	sent,	might	have	met	some	old	or	even
new	acquaintance	who	was	detaining	you.	The	representatives	of	all
the	 firms	 undoubtedly	 meet	 there,	 distinguished,	 well-dressed,
vigorous,	healthy,	amusing	young	men—that	is	to	say,	men	compared
with	whom,	 if	 I	were	 to	 be	 confronted	with	 them	 for	 comparison,	 I
would	 simply	 have	 to	 do	 away	 with	 myself.	 What	 could	 be	 more
natural,	I	said	to	myself,	than	that	you	should	take	a	liking	to	one	of
them,	 especially	 since	 in	 so	 doing	 you	would	 be	 fulfilling	 a	 request
expressed	in	countless	letters	of	mine?	Everything	would	be	resolved;
I	would	be	precisely	where	I	should	have	to	and	seemingly	wish	to	be
—i.e.,	expelled	from	your	presence,	as	would	be	my	desert,	since	I	did
not	hold	you	by	your	hands,	as	one	holds	one’s	beloved,	but	clung	to
your	 feet	 and	 so	made	walking	 impossible	 for	 you.	 So	why	wasn’t	 I
satisfied?	Why	did	 I	get	out	of	bed	with	my	head	virtually	shriveled
up	with	 sleeplessness	and	breathe	 freely	 for	 the	 first	 time	only	after
the	telegram	had	been	sent?

Franz

April	17,	1913
I	could	not	write	to	you	last	night;	I	got	your	letter	this	morning	at	the
office,	your	postcard	just	now	at	home.	You	are	tired	out,	shivery,	and
hoarse,	and	 I	have	contributed	my	share	 to	your	 tiredness.	 If	 it	ever
comes	 to	 a	 reckoning	 between	 us,	 where	 shall	 I	 stand!	 A	 sewing
woman’s	terrible	appearance	has	just	made	my	small	nephew	cry	for
15	minutes;	 after	 these	 last	 few	days	 I	 feel	 as	 dissolved	 as	 he	 does,



although	in	me	there	is	nothing	like	as	much	to	dissolve	as	there	is	in
my	tough	little	nephew.—What	my	letter	has	failed	to	achieve	won’t
be	achieved	by	discussion	either;	 that’s	bad.—Well,	a	postcard	every
day?	 Poor	 Felice!—Which	 of	 the	 hotel	 windows	 is	 yours?—While
reading	your	 letter	 (and	 I	didn’t	draw	breath	until	 the	end,	 so	as	 to
start	reading	it	again	from	the	beginning),	I	felt	that	help	for	me	and
for	everything	lay	only	with	you.

Franz

April	18,	1913
Don’t	 I	 bother	you	with	my	 letters,	 Felice?	 I’m	 sure	 I	bother	you,	 it
cannot	 be	 otherwise.	 Of	 necessity	 you	 are	 wrapped	 up	 in	 business
matters;	the	exhibition	may	be	decisive	for	your	firm	for	a	whole	year
—and	 then	 I	 come	 along	 with	 unconnected,	 irrelevant	 things,	 but
mainly	with	my	despair.	However,	now	that	I	realize	it,	the	exhibition
may	be	over,	I	think	it	was	supposed	to	close	on	the	20th.	Well,	this
mood	 came	 over	 me,	 and	 I	 gave	 in;	 I	 should	 have	 resisted	 more
strongly.	At	this	moment,	for	example,	my	calm	is	exemplary,	but	that
of	course	is	not	good,	either.	To	write,	Felice!	If	only	I	could	write!	I
could	be	a	joy	to	you!	But	I	cannot	afford	to	go	to	bed	as	late	as	11;
only	when	I	go	to	bed	at	10	at	the	latest	do	my	tattered	nerves	come
near,	and	then	only	near,	to	finding	calm.	Will	I	ever	be	able	to	write
again?
And	once	more	I	am	forcing	myself	 into	your	business	affairs	with
things	you	should	not	be	worried	by.	I	shall	stop.

Franz

How	are	 you	 returning	 to	Berlin?	 Stupidly	 enough	 I	 shall	 be	 in
Aussig	 again	 on	 Tuesday,	 the	 22nd.	 Couldn’t	 we	 clasp	 hands
somewhere,	or	else	at	least	reach	out	across	a	somewhat	shorter
distance?	It	would	do	me	good	from	head	to	foot.

April	20,	1913
Far	 too	 long	 in	 bed	 with	 the	 gloomiest	 thoughts	 and	 insuperable
horror	of	all	preparations,	no	matter	how	essential,	for	the	court	case
in	Aussig	on	Tuesday.	I	don’t	know	whether	you	have	yet	received	my
last	 letter	 in	 which	 I	 tell	 you	 about	 Aussig.	 Anyway	 there	 is	 no



possibility	of	our	meeting	on	Tuesday,	but	this	doesn’t	matter,	Felice,
provided	you	are	by	then	out	of	 that	dreadful	Frankfurt.	 It	kept	you
from	me,	and	to	me	it	seemed	as	though	you	did	not	protest	enough,
and	then	again	it	seemed	as	though	you	protested	too	much.	By	now
you	must	be	on	your	way	 to	Berlin,	 it	 is	6:30.	You	know,	 to	 send	a
telegram	 would	 be	 the	 obvious	 thing,	 yet	 invariably	 and	 without
exception	 it	 remains	no	more	 than	an	excellent	 idea.	From,	bed	one
stretches	out	one’s	hand,	and	 there	 is	 the	piece	of	paper	 to	be	 read,
and	 for	 a	 short	 while	 one	 is	 lifted	 out	 of	 the	 odious	 orbit	 of	 one’s
thoughts	and	forcibly	carried	away.	If	only	I	could	write,	Felice!	I	am
consumed	 with	 the	 desire	 to	 do	 so.	 Above	 all,	 if	 only	 I	 were	 free
enough,	and	fit	enough!	I	don’t	think	you	have	properly	taken	in	that
writing	is	 the	only	thing	that	makes	my	inner	existence	possible.	No
wonder,	I	always	express	myself	so	badly;	I	am	awake	only	among	my
imaginary	characters,	but	on	this	subject	I	can	neither	write	nor	talk
convincingly.	Nor	would	this	be	necessary,	provided	I	had	everything
else.
And	it	is	still	another	3	weeks	to	Whitsun,	who	could	be	cheerful?
You	say	everything	will	be	all	right.	Well,	it	won’t	be	for	lack	of	trying
on	my	part.

Franz

April	20,	1913
Well,	it’s	now	Sunday	evening	before	going	to	bed,	and	in	fact	nothing
as	 yet	 prepared	 for	 the	 trial	 in	 Aussig,	 though	 there	 will	 hardly	 be
time	 to	 do	 it	 tomorrow,	 and	 though	 a	 thousand	 things	 should	 be
neatly	arranged	in	my	head	for	these	complicated	pleadings	if	I	wish
to	go	there	with	even	the	slightest	hope	of	success,	or	at	 least	being
more	or	 less	 confident	of	not	making	a	 fool	of	myself.	But	 I	 can’t,	 I
can’t.	 Well,	 if	 it	 were	 only	 a	 question	 of	 studying	 the	 files,	 but
between	me	and	 this	 task	 there	are	 rocks	 to	 indicate	my	 reluctance,
and	 I	 would	 first	 have	 to	 clear	 these	 away.	 I	 can’t.	 Haven’t	 you
noticed,	Felice,	 that	 in	my	 letters	 I	don’t	 in	 fact	 love	you;	 if	 I	did,	 I
would	have	to	think	only	of	you,	write	only	about	you;	but	what	I	do
is	worship	you,	and	in	some	way	expect	your	help	and	blessing	for	the
most	 absurd	 things.	What	 other	 reason	 could	 there	be,	 for	 example,
for	telling	you	about	my	trip	to	Aussig?
The	letter	I	wrote	this	afternoon	will	arrive	torn;	I	tore	it	on	my	way



to	 the	 station	 in	my	 impotent	 rage	 at	 being	 unable	 to	write	 to	 you
frankly	and	clearly,	frankly	and	clearly	no	matter	how	I	try;	with	the
result	that	even	in	writing	I	never	once	succeed	in	holding	on	to	you
and	 in	 somehow	 communicating	 to	 you	 the	 rhythm	 of	 my	 heartbeat,
and	 therefore	 I	 can	 have	 no	 expectations	 beyond	 my	 letters.	 This
afternoon	 for	 instance	 I	 wrote	 that	 I	 am	 awake	 only	 among	 my
imaginary	characters,	or	words	to	this	effect.	That	of	course	is	wrong
and	exaggerated,	and	yet	 the	truth,	 the	only	truth.	But	 in	 this	way	I
never	make	it	clear	to	you;	to	myself,	however,	I	make	it	repugnant.
And	yet	I	must	not	lay	down	my	pen,	though	that	would	be	the	best
thing	to	do;	instead	I	am	compelled	to	try	again	and	again,	and	again
and	again	it	is	bound	to	fail,	and	to	collapse	on	top	of	me.	This	is	why
I	partly	tore	the	letter,	and	should	have	torn	it	completely	and	should
tear	 every	 one	 of	my	 letters,	 because	 it	would	 be	 just	 the	 same,	 or
rather	it	would	be	better	if	only	the	tatters	of	my	letters	were	to	reach
you.
By	now	you	must	be	back	in	Berlin,	which	for	me	is	coming	to	life
again,	and	 in	my	 imagination	occupies	once	again	 the	dignified	and
almost	exalted	position	it	has	held	for	the	past	6	months.

Franz

[ON	THE	FIRST	PAGE	IN	THE	LEFT-HAND	MARGIN]	I’m	told	there	was	something	rather
pleasant	 about	 Meditation	 in	 Wednesday’s	 Berliner	 Tageblatt;	 I
haven’t	read	it,	I	only	heard	about	it	today.83

[PICTURE	POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Aussig,	April	22,	1913]

One	of	our	Institute’s	engineers	who	is	a	witness	at	today’s	trial,	while
I	shall	be	a	kind	of	prosecutor,	 is	sitting	opposite	me	and	still	wants
quickly	 to	discuss	a	number	of	 things;	 I	 insist,	however,	 that	 I	must
first	(at	this	moment	he	is	reading	to	me)	write	a	postcard,	otherwise
the	trial	is	bound	to	turn	out	badly.	Kindest	regards.

Franz

[PICTURE	POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Aussig,	April	22,	1913]



Now	it	has	turned	out	badly,	though	it’s	not	quite	over	yet.	What	can
one	do,	 it’s	not	my	 fault,	 so	don’t	be	cross!	 I	don’t	mind	very	much
anyway,	 for	after	all	 a	 letter	 is	waiting	 for	me	 in	Prague,	and	 that’s
really	the	main	thing.

FK

April	26,	1913
I	hadn’t	time	to	write	to	you,	Felice?	No,	not	that,	nor	am	I	physically
in	worse	shape	than	usual.	And	I	certainly	had	no	wish	to	worry	you
deliberately,	 nor	 deliberately	 to	 forego	writing	 to	 you,	 and	 still	 less
deliberately	 to	 forego	 getting	 your	 replies.	 But—please	 listen	 to	me
quietly—what	 I	 wanted	 to	 give	 you	 was	 time	 to	 consider	 carefully
your	 relationship	 with	 me—for,	 to	 judge	 from	 what	 you	 have	 said
since	Easter	(with	the	possible	exception	of	the	first	two	letters),	I	was
forced	to	believe	(please,	Felice,	just	put	yourself	in	my	place	for	one
moment	and	look	at	everything	in	the	way	I	am	forced	to	see	it)	that	I
am	now	able	to	keep	you	only	by	artificial	means,	by	dispatching	one
letter	 after	 another,	 and	 thus	 not	 giving	 you	 time	 to	 come	 to	 your
senses,	 and	 thereby	 urging	 you	 in	 your	 haste	 to	 use	 old	 words
deprived	 of	 their	 old	 meaning.	 This	 is	 not	 my	 final	 word,	 for	 with
each	 new	 letter	 from	 you	 even	 my	 strongest	 convictions	 begin	 to
waver	anew,	but	if	it	were	so,	it	would	really	have	been	the	only	way
in	which	you	had	ever	disappointed	me,	or	could	possibly	ever	have
disappointed	 me,	 because	 candor	 is	 the	 one	 thing	 I	 have	 expected
from	you	at	all	times.	I	wouldn’t	have	been	surprised	if	at	some	time
you	 had	 dismissed	 me,	 because	 you	 could	 not	 immediately	 have
known	me	for	what	I	am,	indeed	this	was	impossible;	it	was	almost	as
though	 I	 had	 approached	 you	 sideways	 and	 it	 took	 some	 little	 time
before	we	turned	to	face	each	other.	Now	of	course	I	don’t	know	what
your	 final	 decision	may	 be,	 but	 only	 imagine	 that	 I	 can	 sense	 it	 in
your	recent	 letters,	and	 the	one	 thing	 I	cannot	understand,	Felice,	 is
that	you	yourself	shouldn’t	know	how	you	feel	about	it.	You	must	not
imagine	 that	 all	 I	 am	 saying	 is	 due	 to	 your	 letters	 being	 short	 and
infrequent;	you	used	to	write	short	letters	every	now	and	again	and	I
was	quite	happy	and	satisfied.	But	your	recent	letters	are	different.	My
affairs	 are	 no	 longer	 as	 important	 to	 you,	 and	what	 is	much	worse:
you	no	longer	bother	to	tell	me	about	yourself.	So	what	am	I	to	do?	I
could	no	longer	reply	to	these	recent	letters,	and	pictured	you	at	the



office	on	Thursday	morning,	sighing	with	relief	on	discovering	that	at
long	last	there	was	no	letter.

Franz

[LETTERHEAD:	Workers’	Accident	Insurance	Institute]
April	28,	1913

It’s	 impossible	 to	 postpone	 writing;	 surrounded	 as	 I	 am	 by	 all	 the
books	and	papers	from	which	with	the	emptiest	of	heads	I	am	about
to	prepare	a	 lecture	on	“Methods	 for	 the	Prevention	of	Accidents,”	 I
have	 to	 answer	 you.	 So	 I	 wanted	 to	 hurt	 you,	 Felice?	 Hurt?	 You?
When	 my	 one	 desire	 is	 to	 lessen	 as	 best	 I	 can	 all	 the	 unhappiness
which,	 through	 no	 fault	 of	mine,	 passes	 from	me	 to	 you!	 And	 now
your	letter	is	so	very	weary	and	sad.	How	are	things	with	you?	What’s
wrong	with	you,	poor	one?	Am	I	really	such	an	infernal	idiot?	Do	you
imagine	I	would	have	written	as	I	did	at	the	very	first	inkling	of	fear?
I	thought	I	had	any	number	of	proofs,	but	I	don’t	want	to	enumerate
them.	Nor	is	there	time	for	it	now;	when	I	had	read	your	letter	I	felt	a
jolt	as	though	I	had	been	put	back	into	the	world,	after	having	been
outside	it	for	a	long	time.
By	then	I	was	prepared	for	everything,	especially	since	there	was	no
letter	 yesterday.	 I	 am	 not	 ashamed	 to	 say	 that	 I	 took	 it	 to	 be
helplessness	on	your	part,	helplessness	in	another	sense.

At	home
Felice,	tell	me,	isn’t	it	terrible	that	there	is	some	trouble	in	your	life,
and	I	am	excluded	from	it!	Don’t	 I	have	 to	be	 jealous	of	 the	 trouble
that	grips	you?	But	lately	you	have	ceased	altogether	from	mentioning
this	trouble.	I	had	almost	forgotten	about	it.	In	your	letters	you	kept
saying:	“in	haste”	and	“again	in	haste”;	my	eyes	began	to	ache	at	the
very	sight	of	these	words.
And	here	was	I,	roaming	around	with	no	letter	from	you,	no	letter
for	you.	And	I	put	up	with	it.	There	must	be	some	energy	left	in	me.
But	then	I	kept	myself	under	rigid	control.	Without	being	quite	aware
of	 it,	 I	was	 in	 fact	more	active	 than	usual;	 to	 stop	or	give	 in	would
have	been	fatal.	I	imagined	all	kinds	of	things	that	I	don’t	even	wish
to	talk	about.	But	there	is	one	thing	I	can	tell	you:	I	was	determined,	if
no	 letter	arrived,	 to	write	a	 letter	 explaining	 to	you	how	an	 infinite



variety	of	human	relationships	can	exist,	and	that	the	indifference	(at
best,	 that	 is)	 you	 feel	 for	 me	 would	 be	 no	 reason	 to	 forsake	 me
altogether.	I	meant	to	suggest	we	might	even	say	“Sie”	to	each	other
again;	I	meant	to	return	your	letters	on	condition	that	you	kept	mine
—but	this	would	still	be	no	reason	for	you	to	forsake	me.	And	all	the
same	you	should	allow	me	to	come	and	see	you	in	Berlin	at	Whitsun,
for	 this	 journey	was	 far	 too	 definite	 a	 plan,	 the	 changing	 of	 which
would	 turn	my	whole	 life	upside	down.	And	 this	 reception	 for	 your
future	 sister-in-law,	 which	 in	 one	 of	 your	 last	 letters	 seemed	 to	 be
mentioned	almost	as	an	obstacle	to	our	meeting,	would	surely,	if	you
so	 wished,	 allow	 you	 half-an-hour’s	 free	 time.	 Incidentally,	 I	 don’t
understand	these	receptions.
Needless	 to	 say,	 my	 resolutions	 were	 not	 absolutely	 firm.	 For
example,	 I	 definitely	 intended	 to	 telephone	 you	 yesterday,	 though	 I
didn’t	 know	 for	 what	 purpose,	 for	 since	 you	 didn’t	 even	 want	 to
answer	in	writing,	you	would	hardly,	or	so	it	seemed	to	me,	want	to
answer	by	word	of	mouth.	And	yet	I	wanted	to	telephone.	Imagine:	to
hear	your	voice,	on	any	ordinary	afternoon!	But	among	your	letters	I
couldn’t	 find	 the	 one	 in	which	 I	 thought	 I	 remembered	 you	 having
noted	your	 telephone	number.	 It	was	probably	only	on	an	envelope.
But	among	the	numbers	that	appear	on	your	office	letterhead	I	didn’t
know	 which	 to	 choose;	 I	 might	 have	 selected,	 of	 all	 people,	 your
director’s.
By	then,	however,	I	had	formed	a	new	resolution,	and	gave	up	the
idea	of	telephoning.	I	intended	to	go	and	see	Max	in	the	evening,	and
to	ask	him	to	write	to	you.	I	wanted	to	show	him	your	last	3	letters,
tell	him	what	I	had	written	 to	you,	and	 in	addition	 tell	him	about	a
very	 stupid	 theory	 I	 had	 evolved	 to	 explain	 your	 conduct,	 and	 then
beg	him	 to	 ask	 you.	 I	 thought	 you	would	be	 certain	 to	 tell	 him	 the
truth,	since	as	far	as	he	is	concerned	there	would	be	no	obstacles.	He
was	to	have	written	the	letter	at	once,	and	I	intended	to	put	it	on	the
train	 that	 evening.	So	at	8:30	 I	went	 to	Max’s,	but	no	one	was	 in;	 I
walked	up	and	down	the	street	for	45	minutes;	but	they	didn’t	return,
and	even	if	they	had,	it	would	have	been	too	late	for	my	request.	So	I
went	home,	and,	however	sad	my	failure	of	last	night	may	have	made
me,	 I	 am	 now	 very	 glad	 you	 have	 been	 spared	Max’s	 letter,	 which
would	have	arrived	this	morning.
So	will	you	take	me	on	again,	dearest?	For	 the	umpteenth	time?	I
must	 admit,	 however,	 that	 even	 with	 today’s	 letter	 in	 my	 hand,	 I
would	 still	 come	 to	 the	 same	conclusion	 if	 I	were	 to	 relive	 this	past



month.	 And	 this	 in	 spite	 of	 knowing	 that	 in	 any	 untroubled
relationship	this	very	 lack	of	 trust	 is	 the	worst	 thing	one	person	can
do	to	the	other.	I	know	it	from	the	past	when,	months	ago,	you	once
wrote	something	that	showed	a	lack	of	trust,	but	that	was	only	once,
whereas	I	never	stop.	Felice!	And	Whitsun?	I	no	longer	even	dare	to
kiss	you,	and	shall	never	kiss	you.	I	am	not	worthy	of	it.

Franz

[ABOVE	THE	LETTERHEAD	ON	THE	FIRST	PAGE]	Shall	I	receive	a	kind	word	from	you
on	 Thursday?	 If	 so,	 you	 would	 have	 to	 send	 it	 express.	 It’s	 a
holiday,	and	there	is	only	one	delivery.	But	I	shall	be	at	the	office
until	12.

April	29	to	30,	1913
It’s	late	now.	I	went	to	a	Yiddish	performance	with	Max,	his	wife,	and
Weltsch,	 but	 hurried	 out	 before	 the	 end	 in	 order	 to	 send	 you	 a	 few
lines.	 What	 a	 lovely	 feeling	 to	 be	 allowed	 to	 do	 it!	 What	 a	 lovely
feeling	 to	 be	 in	 your	 safekeeping	 when	 confronted	 by	 this	 fearful
world	which	I	venture	to	take	on	only	during	nights	of	writing.	Today
I	 thought	 that	 one	 had	nothing	 to	 complain	 of	 so	 long	 as	 one	 lived
with	this	dual	feeling:	that	someone	one	loves	is	well	disposed	toward
one,	 and	 that	 at	 the	 same	 time	 one	 had	 boundless	 possibilities	 of
doing	 away	 with	 oneself	 at	 any	 moment.—Dearest,	 how	 do	 you
visualize	my	Whitsun	visit?	The	other	day	before	going	to	sleep	I	had
a	wonderful	idea,	but	it	is	wonderful	only	before	going	to	sleep,	and
yet	 can	 be	 carried	 out	 only	 in	 broad	 daylight.	 But	 I	won’t	 reveal	 it
until	you	have	answered	the	following	questions.	Shall	I	call	on	your
family	at	Whitsun?	And	how	do	you	imagine	that	should	be	done?
Having	 presented	 you	 with	 these	 difficulties,	 I	 am	 going	 to	 bed,
fairly	 calm,	 if	 it	weren’t	 for	 your	 troubles	 that	 still	 seem	 to	 depress
you.

Yours

April	30,	afternoon
This	 morning	 in	 haste	 (I	 am	 appropriating	 that	 word	 and	 not
returning	 it	 to	you)	 I	 took	the	wrong	 letter,	and	must	now	send



this	one	express.	Before	doing	 so	 I	quickly	kiss	your	dear	hand,
though	it	didn’t	put	a	single	line	on	paper	for	me	yesterday.

May	1,	1913
No	letter.	Could	I	have	misunderstood	the	telegram	in	spite	of	having
read	it	so	many	times,	in	spite	of	its	having	spent	the	night	under	my
pillow?	Dearest,	shut	your	eyes	to	the	fact	that	I	send	you	nothing	but
reproaches,	 nasty	 and	 ungrateful	 creature	 that	 I	 am.	 But	 listen,
although	I	am	at	 the	office	my	heart	 is	actually	beating	 in	 the	 letter
which	I	assume	to	be	waiting	at	home.	And	then	I	hurry	home	and	it
isn’t	there,	and	so	my	sentence	is	pronounced:	I	shall	have	to	wait	at
least	one	more	day	and	one	more	night.	I	really	don’t	want	to	pester
you;	it’s	summer,	you	shouldn’t	write	much,	nor	should	you	worry	if
for	once	you	haven’t	written—all	right,	let	us	make	a	pact	that	I	am	to
get	but	one	letter	per	week,	on	Sundays,	but	without	fail,	whether	you
are	moving	house,	or	there	is	an	exhibition	or	some	other	disaster	(in
my	 sense	 of	 the	 word);	 in	 fact	 a	 letter	 you	 can	 write	 and	 add	 to
whenever	you	have	 the	 time	or	 inclination,	but	one	 that	will	 finally
have	 to	be	mailed	every	Saturday	morning.	Will	you	be	so	kind?	So
that	 I	won’t	 have	 to	 go	on	waiting,	 so	 that	 the	 time	will	 pass	more
smoothly	and	less	slowly,	for	here	the	clocks	strike	only	when	there	is
a	letter	from	you.	Also,	my	head	will	improve;	although	it	looks	as	if	I
had	invented	this	headache	on	the	spur	of	the	moment	in	support	of
my	request,	I	do	really	have	it.	Or	rather,	not	so	much	a	headache	as
indescribable	 tension.	 I	 ought	 to	 be	writing,	 says	 the	 doctor	within.
Write,	though	my	head	is	so	unsteady,	and	though	a	short	time	ago	I
had	 occasion	 to	 recognize	 the	 inadequacy	 of	 my	 writing.	 Yes,	 I
haven’t	told	you	yet	that	a	very	short	book	of	mine	(47	pages)	is	to	be
published	next	month,	the	page	proofs	are	right	here.	It	is	called	The
Stoker:	A	Fragment,	and	is	the	first	chapter	of	that	unfortunate	novel.	It
will	 appear	 in	 an	 inexpensive	 series	 which	Wolff	 is	 publishing	 and
which	 will	 be	 given	 the	 somewhat	 ludicrous	 title	 “The	 Day	 of
Judgment,”	80	pfennigs	each	volume.	I	rather	dislike	the	whole	idea,
as	 I	do	any	useless	contrivance	of	a	unity	 that	 isn’t	 really	 there.	But
first	of	all	I	am	indebted	to	Wolff,	secondly	he	practically	wormed	the
story	 out	 of	 me,	 and	 thirdly	 he	 was	 kind	 enough	 to	 guarantee	 to
publish	“The	Stoker”	later	on,	together	with	your	story	and	another	in
one	larger	volume.84—The	moment	 I	 talk	about	anything	other	 than
you,	I	feel	as	though	I	were	lost.



Franz

May	2,	1913
You	still	misunderstand	me,	Felice,	even	 in	 this	 trifling	matter.	How
could	I	possibly	be	cross	if	you	send	me	such	a	very	friendly	postcard?
Only	those	tiny	little	sentences	you	wrote,	especially	from	Frankfurt,
which	 contained	 neither	 information	 nor	 explanation	 and	 hardly	 a
greeting,	 but	 only	 haste,	 nothing	 but	 haste,	 and	 seemed—seemed!
seemed!—to	start	with	a	sigh	of	vexation	and	end	with	a	sigh	of	relief
(I	have	to	air	all	my	complaints	to	you,	since	you	are	my	dearest	one,
hence	also	my	complaints	about	you)—it	was	only	these	little	letters
that	upset	me	so	much.
But	now	your	brother’s	engagement—I	haven’t	even	congratulated
you,	 but	 you	 may	 be	 jealous	 of	 your	 sister-in-law,	 in	 which	 case
there’s	 no	 cause	 for	 congratulation—seems	 to	 preoccupy	 you.	 And
this,	considering	the	two	short	holidays	at	Whitsun,	is	very	sad.	What
shall	 we	 do	 in	 those	 two	 days?	 I	 tell	 you,	 I	 have	 almost	 stopped
thinking	 about	 those	 two	days,	 but	 think	 instead	 about	 the	 horrible
period	to	follow,	when,	short	of	some	great	miracle,	 I	won’t	see	you
for	a	very	long	time,	unless	you	come	to	Italy	with	me,	or	at	least	to
Lake	Garda,	 or	 perhaps	 even	 to	 Spain	 to	 see	my	uncle.85	 I	 ask	 you,
Felice,	 to	 think	 it	 over	 quickly	 and	 carefully.	 I	 would	 not	 have
mentioned	my	wish	to	call	on	your	parents,	for	neither	do	I	look	nor
am	 I	 more	 presentable	 now	 than	 I	 was	 2	 months	 ago,	 but	 what	 I
feared	above	all	was	a	repetition	of	our	momentary	meetings,	of	being
in	 Berlin	 and	 lying	 on	 a	 sofa	 for	 up	 to	 5	 hours	 waiting	 for	 that
uncertain	 telephone	 call.	 As	 for	 your	 brother,	 I	 ought	 to	 be	 faintly
familiar	to	him;	did	you	tell	him	at	the	time	who	I	am,	or	how	else	did
you	 explain	 our	meeting?	 Anyway,	 everything	 is	 a	 little	 easier	 now
that	you	no	longer	live	so	far	away.86	But	still,	just	think	it	over,	think
it	over!	My	head	refuses	to.

Franz

May	3,	1913
Just	now	when	I	sat	down	to	write	to	you	I	kept	saying	“dearest”	to
myself,	 and	 didn’t	 realize	 it	 till	 later.	 If	 only,	 just	 for	 once,	 I	 could
make	you	understand	what	you	mean	to	me!	And	for	that	matter	I	am
even	less	capable	of	doing	it	when	we	are	close	than	when	we’re	far



apart.
This	afternoon	I	went	 for	a	walk	all	by	myself;	hands	 in	pockets	 I
strolled	a	long	way	up	the	river.	I	didn’t	feel	well;	I	had	to	keep	telling
myself	that	I	may	always	have	felt	unwell	 in	the	same	way,	that	the
same	 ghosts	 have	 always	 been	 at	 work,	 but	 that	 my	 powers	 of
resistance	 used	 to	 be	 much	 greater,	 and	 were	 now	 becoming
increasingly	 weaker,	 until	 the	 resistance	 becomes	 mere	 sham	 and
finally	would	cease	altogether.	 It	 is	 true	that	 I	used	to	marvel	at	 the
soundness	of	my	head	which	apparently	managed	to	shake	everything
off	from	sheer	lack	of	comprehension,	but	perhaps	it	wasn’t	just	lack
of	comprehension,	 rather	 that	 soundness	which	vanished	 long	ago.	 I
have	just	spent	a	whole	hour	with	my	family	with	the	sole	object	of
trying	to	find	my	way	back	from	my	isolation,	but	I	did	not	find	the
way.
My	walk	ended—I	hadn’t	been	in	that	particular	neighborhood	for
years—at	 some	 miserable	 shack	 on	 the	 river.	 The	 roof	 was	 so
dilapidated	 that	 it	 just	managed	 to	 cling	 on	 precariously;	 the	 small
garden	was	 rather	 better	 cared	 for,	 and	 seemed	 to	 be	 of	 rich	 damp
soil.	 In	 retrospect	 it	 strikes	me	as	having	been	strangely	dark,	but	 it
did	 lie	 in	 a	hollow,	 and	when	 I	 peered	 in,	 it	was	dark	 anyway	as	 a
thunderstorm	 was	 about	 to	 break.	 Although	 the	 whole	 place	 didn’t
look	very	 tempting,	 I	 started	 to	plan	nevertheless.	The	 shack	 should
not	 be	 too	 expensive,	 one	 could	 buy	 the	 lot,	 build	 a	 decent	 little
house,	improve	the	garden,	lay	steps	down	to	the	river,	which	is	fairly
wide	there,	with	an	open	view	into	the	distance	beyond	the	far	bank;
down	below	one	could	moor	a	boat,	and	altogether	might	lead	a	more
peaceful	and	contented	life	than	in	town,	which	is	within	easy	reach
by	 tram.	 (A	nearby	 cement	 factory	with	 a	 lot	 of	 smoke	discharge	 is
the	 one	 thing	 that	 might	 make	 one	 hesitate.)	 These	 were	 the	 only
comforting	thoughts	to	intrude	on	my	long	walk.

Franz

May	4,	1913
Why	does	writing	to	you	not	affect	me	more,	why	doesn’t	it	alleviate
the	fits	of	despair	I	get	into	at	times	at	the	thought	of	your	being	so
far	 away,	 those	 fits	 of	 despair	 that	 have	 become	 more	 than	 ever
unbearable	now,	before	my	trip	to	Berlin,	for	what	is	going	to	happen
after	this	Whitsun?



So	 you	want	me	 to	 call	 on	 your	 family?	 In	 that	 case	 answer	 the
following	questions	 in	good	time:	What	 is	your	 telephone	number?	 I
assume	it	can’t	be	in	the	book	yet?	Must	I	wear	a	black	suit,	or	will	it
be	good	enough	if	I	arrive	as	a	chance	visitor	in	my	ordinary	summer
suit?	 I	 should	much	prefer	 the	 latter,	or	 rather	 the	 former	would	be
almost	 impossible.	 Do	 I	 arrive	 with	 flowers	 for	 your	 mother?	 And
what	kind	of	flowers?
I	 shall	 again	 be	 staying	 at	 the	 Askanische	 Hof.	 And	 again	 I	 shall
probably	arrive	at	11	[P.M.],	but	quite	apart	from	the	fact	that	this	is
uncertain	(I	have	a	lot	of	work	to	do	at	the	office,	work	I	am	less	and
less	able	to	cope	with,	anyone	else	would	dispose	of	it	all	with	ease),	I
implore	 you	 not	 even	 to	 think	 of	 coming	 to	 meet	 me.	 On	 arriving
anywhere	I	am	always	in	a	terrible	state,	and	you	wouldn’t	be	pleased
if,	 from	 a	 sense	 of	 insecurity,	 absentmindedness,	weariness,	 despair,
and	 love,	 I	 fell	 into	 your	 arms	 right	 there	 in	 the	 station.	 So	 please
don’t	even	think	of	it!
You	 say	 at	 Whitsun	 the	 mornings	 will	 have	 to	 be	 spent	 at	 the
receptions,	which	means	Monday	as	well.87	That’s	bad.	And	I	shall	be
leaving	again	on	Monday	evening.	I	shan’t	be	able	to	stay	any	longer.
Briefly,	 my	 “wonderful”	 idea	 is	 as	 follows:	 Provided	 you	 agree,	 I
shall	tell	your	father	everything	which	so	far	I	have	been	incapable	of
saying	 to	 you,	 and	 secondly	 everything	 I	 have	 already	 said	 and
written	to	you,	which	you	haven’t	taken	seriously	enough.	That	is	my
plan.	With	what	knowledge	you	have	of	yourself,	of	your	father,	and
of	me,	do	you	think	it	feasible?	Yesterday,	apropos	of	something,	Felix
said	that	I	could	do	with	a	guardian.	That’s	not	a	bad	idea,	I	could	do
with	one	both	in	the	ordinary	and	the	most	sublime	sense,	though	it
may	be	too	late.

Franz

[IN	 THE	MARGINS	OF	 THE	 FIRST	 AND	 FOURTH	 PAGES]	Please	answer	all	my	questions!
Did	you	get	two	letters	from	me	on	Friday?	You	didn’t	reply	to	one
of	my	suggestions.
Don’t	 lick	 the	 indelible	pencil,	as	you	did	 in	your	 last	 letter	but
one!

May	7,	1913
The	 way	 Felice	 is	 being	 harassed	 and	 dragged	 about,	 and	 all	 for
nothings!	You	know	my	complaints	about	it,	I	won’t	repeat	them.



So	I	am	not	to	see	you	on	Sunday	morning,	Felice?	Only	hear	your
voice?	A	pleasure	indeed,	which	could	fill	a	morning,	had	I	but	more
than	 two	mornings.	But	 to	attend	 the	 reception	would	be	 rather	 too
fantastic,	don’t	you	think?	I	am	a	stranger,	knowing	neither	hosts	nor
guests,	 and	 would	 be	 offering	 my	 congratulations	 to	 an	 engaged
couple	whom	I	hadn’t	met	until	that	moment—even	so,	in	principle	I
ought	to	have	no	objections,	since	I	am	certainly	no	better	at	coping
with	everyday	situations;	on	the	contrary.	So	if	it	is	possible	from	the
point	of	view	of	the	party,	then	it	is	certainly	possible	from	mine,	for	I
would	see	you	for	a	little	longer,	and	that	is	good	enough	reason	for
me.	But	 should	 it	 be	 impossible	 for	me	 to	 see	you,	 and	 should	you,
which	 is	 most	 likely,	 be	 dragged	 around	 by	 a	 lot	 of	 people,	 then	 I
would	gladly	forego	the	whole	thing,	especially	since	I	cannot	imagine
that	 it	 could	pass	 off	without	 some	minor	unpleasantnesses	 for	 you.
But	 since	 you	 nevertheless	mention	 the	 possibility	 of	 this	 visit—but
no,	 you	 never	 considered	 it	 carefully,	 you	 were	 distracted	 by	 the
overseas	 mail	 on	 your	 desk.	 But	 you	 did	 once	 write	 that	 I	 might
accompany	 you	 to	 the	Heilborns’	 (there	 are	 4?),	 and	 this	would	 be
best	of	all,	and	this	is	what	I	ask	of	you.
Of	 course	 you	 can	 telephone	 me	 any	 time	 you	 like;	 no	 doubt	 it
won’t	 be	 possible	 for	 you	 before	 9	 o’clock,	 and	 from	9	 o’clock	 on	 I
shall	be	ready,	but	if	for	instance	you	wanted	to	telephone	me	at	7	in
the	morning,	you	need	only	write	and	say	so,	and	at	7	I	shall	be	in	the
telephone	 booth	 like	 a	 soldier	 in	 his	 sentry	 box.	 But	 in	 any	 case	 I
should	like	to	have	your	telephone	number.
Needless	 to	 say,	my	 stories	 for	 your	 father	were	no	more	 than	an
idea;	it	couldn’t	be	carried	out;	it	was	a	dream.
I	have	but	one	 fear:	 that	 just	because	of	my	possible	visit	 to	your
parents,	I	will	have	less	of	you	than	if	I	came	to	see	you	alone.

Franz

[IN	THE	LOWER	MARGIN	OF	THE	SECOND	PAGE]	Please	send	to	my	office	the	letter	you
may	have	intended	for	me	for	Saturday;	I	shall	be	there	the	whole
morning,	 and	 it	 certainly	wouldn’t	 arrive	 at	 the	 apartment	 before
Sunday.

May	8,	1913
My	letters	to	you,	Felice,	are	now	expected	to	help	me	in	all	kinds	of
ways;	 writing	 this	 letter,	 for	 example,	 is	 supposed	 to	 dispel	 my



annoyance	at	just	having	smashed	my	nice	shaving-mirror.
I	 didn’t	mean	 to	 punish	 you,	 Felice;	 after	 all,	 even	 in	my	wildest

dreams	 I	 cannot	 imagine	 that	 my	 not	 writing	 could	 constitute	 any
kind	 of	 punishment;	 so	 far	 I	 haven’t	 written	 you	 many	 gratifying
letters,	and	to	omit	an	ungratifying	one	can	hardly	be	a	punishment.
My	 reason	 for	not	writing	was	 rather	 that	 I	 realized	 that	waiting	 in
vain	for	a	letter	from	you	is	partly	so	unbearable	because	writing	and
not	 getting	 an	 answer	 seems	 to	 create	 a	 breach—instead	 of	 a	 letter
there	comes	through	the	air	a	cry	of	“Enough!	Enough!”—whereas	if	I
don’t	 write	 either,	 everything	 remains	 beautifully	 poised	 as	 before,
with	the	one	sad	exception	that	I	have	no	news	of	you.	And	because	I
am	 so	very	 frail	 and	womanish	 just	 now,	 and	 the	 tension	 about	my
head	 never	 ceases,	 as	 though	 the	 skull	 were	 too	 small,	 I	 pampered
myself	by	not	writing.	It	was	not	right,	nor	has	it	done	much	good.
Why	on	earth	have	you	always	so	much	to	do	at	the	office?	Aren’t

your	 clients	 in	 Leipzig	 and	 Frankfurt	 already	 satiated	 with
Parlographs?
On	my	way	home	from	the	office	today	(with	a	colleague	who	is	as

nice	 as	 he	 is	 amusing;	 he	wore	 his	 overcoat	 loose	 on	 his	 shoulders,
and	I	dragged	him	by	his	empty	sleeve	all	the	way	along	the	Graben
at	the	double),	I	saw	a	girl	completely	engrossed	in	conversation;	her
open,	friendly,	lively	face	was	smiling	with	a	smile	so	like	yours	that	I
almost	 took	 it	 for	 a	 greeting	 from	 you.	 Actually	 there	 are	 many
likenesses	in	the	world,	which	is	rather	reassuring,	though	disquieting
too,	because	one	looks	for	them.
Now	look,	Felice,	you’ve	got	our	families	mixed	up!	It’s	yours	that

plays	 66,	 here	 they	 play	 a	 different	 game:	 Franzefuss.	 But	 this	 is
among	the	 least	of	one’s	worries;	 in	 the	 long	run	my	parents	put	up
with	more	 from	me	 than	 I	 from	 them,	 though	undoubtedly	 they	are
well	able	to	stand	more.
Today	for	instance	I	feel	particularly	wretched;	if	I’m	not	in	better

form	when	I	make	my	entry	into	Berlin,	well—!	You	must	admit	that	I
know	how	to	make	myself	attractive.

Franz



[May	10,	1913]
A	 pleasant	 Sunday	 morning,	 Felice!	 Sent	 from	 Prague,	 and	 to	 be
confirmed	in	Berlin.

Franz

But	will	I	be	able	to	see	you	alone?	If	only	no	one	knew	about	it.

May	12	to	13,	1913
I	have	 just	arrived,	Felice,	 so	 it	 is	 rather	 late,	but	 I	have	 to	write	 to
you;	 I	 think	 of	 nothing	 but	 you,	 everything	 I	 saw	 on	my	 journey	 I
connected	 with	 you,	 and	 the	 impression	 each	 thing	 made	 was
conditioned	 by	 the	 friendliness	 or	 unfriendliness	 of	 this	 connection.
We	 still	 have	 so	 much	 to	 discuss,	 Felice!	 My	 head	 is	 reeling.	 The
journey	 has	 made	 me	 realize	 that	 there	 is	 no	 way	 of	 recognizing
things	except	in	each	other’s	presence.	I	am	really	very	confident	just
now,	you	know;	we	still	have	a	number	of	 terrible	things	to	discuss,
but	then	we	might	really	be	out	of	the	wood.	You	know,	after	all,	how
invariably	 I	 lead	 you	 along	 unattractive	 paths,	 even	 if	 there	 is	 a
beautiful	lake	nearby.	Is	this	due	entirely	to	it	being	so	late	at	night?
While	packing	my	bag	in	Berlin	I	had	other	words	in	mind.	“I	cannot
live	 without	 her,	 nor	 with	 her,”	 and	 with	 these	 words	 I	 threw	 one
thing	 after	 another	 into	 the	 bag,	 and	 felt	 something	 was	 about	 to
explode	in	my	breast.
But	I	won’t	be	able	to	solve	it	now,	will	I?	It	is	just	on	1	o’clock.	All
I	can	do	now	is	imagine	that	your	dear	hand	is	in	mine.	Were	the	two
fingers	that	were	raised	when	floating	upward	in	the	elevator	making
a	vow?

Franz

[IN	THE	LOWER	MARGINS	OF	THE	LAST	TWO	PAGES]	One	request!	The	request	of	a	poor
human	being	who	 cannot	 bear	 uncertainty.	 If	 you	 intend	 to	write
more	 than	 once	 a	 week,	 then	 let	 it	 be	 one	 letter	 to	 arrive	 on
Wednesdays,	and	another	on	Sundays.	Yes?

May	13,	1913
Who	 knows	 whether	 I	 shall	 get	 a	 letter	 tomorrow,	 and	 how	 you,
dearest,	dearest	Felice,	have	reacted	 to	 the	craziness	of	my	behavior



during	 those	 two	 days	 in	 Berlin.	 You	 don’t	 know,	 Felice,	 you	 don’t
know	what	 it	 is	 that	 imprisons	me	and	makes	me	 the	unhappiest	of
men,	 in	 spite	 of	 seeming	 to	 be	 very	 close	 to	 you—you,	 my	 sole
purpose	on	this	earth.	Oh	God,	I	wish	you	were	not	on	this	earth,	but
entirely	within	me,	or	rather	that	I	were	not	on	this	earth,	but	entirely
within	you;	I	feel	there	is	one	too	many	of	us;	the	separation	into	two
people	 is	 unbearable.	 Then	 why,	 Felice,	 don’t	 I	 take	 you	 to	 me	 at
once,	at	least	as	close	as	physical	space	will	allow?	Why	instead	do	I
squirm	 on	 the	 forest	 ground	 like	 one	 of	 those	 animals	 you	 are	 so
frightened	 of?	 There	must	 be	 a	 reason,	mustn’t	 there?	On	 the	 other
hand	I	am	not	exactly	an	enchanted	prince	either,	even	if	enchanted
princes	 are	 in	 the	 habit	 of	 being	 concealed	 in	 abominations	 of	 that
kind;	 it	 would	 be	 good	 enough	 and	 marvelous	 if	 I	 were	 simply	 an
enchanted	tolerable	man.	You	would	be	content,	wouldn’t	you?
But	as	long	as	I	have	to	battle	with	such	things,	which	can	hardly	be

rendered	 in	 human	 terms—and	 for	 weeks	 not	 one	 ounce	 of	 my
strength	has	been	used	for	any	other	purpose—what	shall	I	do	when	I
don’t	feel	sure	of	you,	when	you	bewilder	me?	It	is	so	terribly	easy	to
understand	it	if	you	were	to	give	up	with	a	sigh;	if	I	were	you	I’d	have
run	to	the	other	end	of	the	earth;	but	you	are	not	I,	your	nature	is	to
act;	you	are	energetic,	quick-thinking,	observant;	 I	 saw	you	at	home
(the	 way	 you	 once	 raised	 your	 head	 at	 some	 remark!),	 I	 saw	 you
among	strangers	in	Prague,	you	were	always	sympathetic,	yet	sure	of
yourself—but	when	you	are	with	me,	you	flag,	turn	your	head	or	stare
at	 the	 grass,	 endure	 the	 silly	 things	 I	 say	 as	well	 as	my	many	well-
founded	silences,	do	not	 seriously	wish	 to	know	anything	about	me,
but	simply	suffer,	suffer,	suffer—Felice,	how	do	you	think	I	feel	when
we	have	parted?	Do	you	imagine	I	don’t	sympathize	with	you?	Do	you
imagine	that	life	means	anything	to	me	at	that	point?
That	 time	 when	 Max	 was	 in	 Berlin	 and	 talked	 to	 you	 on	 the

telephone88	you	are	alleged,	and	I	can	well	 imagine	it,	 to	have	been
very	gay	and	confident,	to	have	laughed	a	great	deal,	but	among	other
things	 to	 have	 said:	 “I	 don’t	 know	why	 it	 is,	 he	writes	 to	me	 fairly
often,	but	his	 letters	never	come	to	the	point,	 I	don’t	know	what	it’s
all	 about,	 we	 haven’t	 come	 any	 closer	 to	 each	 other,	 and	 for	 the
moment	there	is	no	hope.”	And	yet	that	was	at	the	very	beginning,	at
a	 time	when	 one	 draws	 closer	 by	 leaps	 and	 bounds,	 because	 one	 is
still	 covering	 the	 great,	 obvious,	 generally	 accessible	 distances	 that
separate	any	one	human	being	from	another.	Nevertheless,	this	is	how
you	felt	even	then,	whereas	at	 that	 time	I	was	filled	with	secret	and



infinite	 delight	 at	 having	 come	 by	 only	 a	 few	 leaps	 so	 close	 to	 this
idolized	 being.	 And	 today,	might	 you	 still	 feel	what	 you	 said	 then?
Your	 eyes,	 your	 words,	 your	 silences	 seem	 to	 prove	 it,	 but	 nearly
everything	else	seems	to	contradict	it.	But	the	former	is	more	obvious.
How	shall	I	find	my	way,	and	in	this	resignation	may	I	touch	even	the
tips	of	your	fingers?

Yours	(were	I	but	nameless,	totally	obliterated	and	only	yours)

May	15,	1913
Where	 is	 Eberswalde?89	 Far	 from	 Berlin?	 Had	 you	 received	 my
registered	 letter	 when	 you	 wrote	 the	 postcard?	 (Needless	 to	 say,	 I
have	already	had	all	yours,	for	I	went	straight	from	the	station	to	the
office	to	look;	from	the	moment	I	stepped	out	of	the	house	at	5	A.M.,
my	entire	 journey	was	organized	with	 that	 in	mind;	 even	 so,	 it	was
very	good	of	you	to	send	postcards	to	both	places—now	I	think	there
is	 no	 room	 for	 further	 gratitude	 between	 us.)	 But	 of	 course	 these
postcards	are	not	the	answer	to	that	letter;	I	will	be	getting	an	answer,
Felice,	 won’t	 I?	 I	 do	 beg	 you	 for	 it.	 It	 is	 so	 important	 to	 have	 an
answer	 to	 it,	 you	 surely	 realize	 this,	dearest,	dearest!	Without	 it	my
idea	 of	 you	would	 be	 shattered.	 All	 right,	 you	will	 answer;	 I	 won’t
mention	it	again.
How	 is	 your	 family?	 My	 impressions	 of	 them	 are	 very	 confused,

probably	due	to	the	fact	that	your	family	presented	an	aspect	of	total
resignation	so	far	as	I	am	concerned.	I	felt	so	very	small	while	they	all
stood	around	me	 like	giants	with	 such	 fatalistic	expressions	on	 their
faces	(with	the	exception	of	your	sister	Erna,	to	whom	I	instantly	felt
drawn).	 It	was	entirely	 in	keeping	with	the	situation:	you	are	theirs,
so	they	are	big,	you	are	not	mine,	so	I	was	small;	but	surely	that	was
only	 the	way	7,	not	 they,	 saw	 it;	 so	how—despite	all	 their	kindness
and	 hospitality—did	 they	 come	 to	 adopt	 this	 attitude?	 I	 must	 have
made	a	very	nasty	impression	on	them;	I	don’t	want	to	know	about	it;
all	 I	want	 to	know	is	what	your	sister	Erna	said,	even	 if	 it	was	very
critical	or	malicious.	Will	you	tell	me	that?

Franz

[IN	 THE	 LOWER	 MARGIN]	Max’s	 old	 review90	 happens	 to	 be	 at	 hand;	 I	 am
sending	it	to	you	with	a	sigh.	Comparisons!	Comparisons!



[May	16,	1913]
Dearest,	listen!	Do	not	stray	from	the	path	by	which	you	were	coming
toward	me!	But	should	you	have	to,	then	turn	back!	Tell	me,	do	you
feel	 how	much	 I	 love	 you?	Do	 you	 feel	 it	 in	 spite	 of	 all	 that	which
now—and	more	 so	 in	Berlin	 than	 from	afar—keeps	me	hidden	 from
you?	My	 love	makes	 the	words	 stick	 in	my	 throat	 and	 floods	 every
syllable	I	mean	to	write.

Franz

There	was	no	letter,	perhaps	because	today	is	a	holiday.91
Fridayc	 evening.	 I	 can	 easily	mistake	 the	 days	 I	 spend	 away	 from

you,	they	have	no	meaning	for	me.	I	feel	as	though	the	whole	world
had	crashed	 into	you.	Love	me	a	 little,	Felice.	What	you	give	me	 in
the	way	of	love	is	the	blood	that	flows	through	my	heart,	I	have	none
of	my	own.
When	 is	 your	 father	 coming	 back?	 I	 think	 a	 great	 deal	 about	 the

letter;	as	a	result	it’s	bound	to	be	bad;	like	everything	I	try	to	arrive	at
by	 a	 process	 of	 thought,	 bad,	 i.e.,	 a	 bad	 mixture	 of	 clarity	 and
ambiguity.	 Nevertheless—at	 this	 moment	 nothing	 is	 of	 greater
importance	 in	my	 life.	 I	will	write	 it	 in	such	a	way	that	you	will	be
able	to	read	it;	I	will	send	it	to	you	first	for	your	appraisal.	So	when
will	your	father	be	back,	and	when	is	the	most	opportune	moment?
But	even	this	loses	its	importance	in	face	of	the	letter	I	hope	to	find

first	thing	tomorrow	at	the	office.
Yours,	F.

May	18,	1913
My	 dearest	 Felice,	 is	 there	 any	 purpose	 (I	 am	 saying	 this	 from	my
point	 of	 view)	 in	 prolonging	 the	 torment	 of	 uncertainty	 simply
because	 somewhere	 it	 contains	 a	 slight,	 unreasonable,	 and	 instantly
vanishing	consolation?	I	am	not	going	to	wait	for	your	father’s	return,
I	may	even	write	the	letter	this	evening,	send	it	to	you	tomorrow	for
your	scrutiny,	and	then	mail	 it	 to	your	 father	 in	Berlin,	or	wherever
he	happens	to	be.	After	all,	the	reply	to	this	letter	won’t	be	dependent
on	 a	 mood,	 nor	 differ	 whether	 written	 from	 one	 place	 or	 another.
There	is	no	point	in	waiting.
There	 may	 be	 some	 point	 after	 all,	 but	 I	 don’t	 wish	 to	 know	 it.



Dearest,	I	know	I	should	and	can	“trust	you	blindly.”	But	do	you	know
whether	you	can	trust	yourself?	Whether	you	can	trust	yourself	in	all
that	 is	 in	 store	 for	 you?	 I’m	 sure	 you	 must	 at	 least	 have	 some
misgivings.	You	don’t	know	what	it	is	that	inhibits	you	in	relation	to
me.	It	is	not	that	you	are	“a	stupid	child”	(when	you	are	present	there
is	 no	 one	 I	 feel	 more	 inferior	 to	 than	 you),	 it	 is	 nature	 itself	 that
inhibits	you.	But	you	are	going	to	tell	me	more	about	this	(a	promise	I
shall	hold	you	to!);	at	bottom	I	am	ready	to	let	myself	be	convinced	by
the	slightest	shaking	of	your	head.
There	 is	 one	 colossal	 objection	 to	 certain	 concepts	 of	 future

happiness:	 eventualities	 that	 cannot	 be	 foreseen.	 Just	 as	 one	 thinks
one	has	the	right	to	prove	the	existence	of	God	by	one’s	own	concept
of	God,	 so	 it	 can	 be	 disproved	 by	 the	 absence	 of	 any	 such	 concept.
Had	I	but	known	you	8	or	10	years	ago	(the	past	is	as	undeniable	as	it
is	lost),	how	happy	we	might	be	today—no	miserable	prevarications,
no	sighs,	no	hopeless	silences.	Instead—all	this	was	years	ago—there
were	girls	I	fell	in	love	with	easily,	was	gay	with,	and	left	with	even
greater	ease,	or	who	left	me	without	causing	the	slightest	pain.	(It	is
only	the	plural	that	makes	them	sound	so	numerous,	because	I	don’t
give	their	names,	and	because	it	 is	all	so	long	ago.)	There	may	have
been	 one	woman	 I	 loved	 enough	 to	 feel	 shaken	 to	my	 very	 depths,
that	is	now	7	or	8	years	ago.92	Since	then,	though	by	no	means	as	a
result,	I	have	been	almost	completely	detached	from	everything,	more
and	 more	 confined	 to	 myself;	 my	 wretched	 physical	 state,	 which—
how	 shall	 I	 put	 it?—preceded	or	 followed	my	dissolution,	helped	 to
submerge	me	still	further,	until—when	I	had	almost	reached	the	end
—I	met	you.

Franz
Enclosed:

May	18,	1913
Today	I	came	across	this	old	letter93	of	mine,	from	happier,	unhappier
days.	What	do	you	think	of	 it?	Answer	as	you	would	have	answered
then.

Franz

[End	of	September/beginning	of	October,	1912]
Fräulein	 Bauer,	 I	 am	 interrupting	 my	 writing	 at	 12:30	 at	 night	 in



order	to	hold	on	to	you94	for	one	moment.	I	am	doing	so	not	because
it	is	essential	at	this	moment;	on	the	contrary,	I	feel	fairly	strong	just
now,	otherwise	I	would	never	have	been	able	to	interrupt	my	writing.
But	I	am	trembling	all	over,	just	as	the	light	made	the	screen	tremble
in	 the	 early	 days	 of	 the	 cinematograph,	 as	 you	may	 remember.	 For
more	than	a	week	now	I	have	been	too	happy,	and	have	suffered	too
much.	I	have	worked	through	the	first	half	and	drowsed	through	the
second	half	of	 several	nights	past.	My	office	all	day	and	all	kinds	of
things,	 and	 my	 feeble,	 wretched	 self.	 To	 whom	 would	 it	 be	 more
healthy	to	complain	just	now	than	you	with	your	great	tranquility?

Yours,	Franz	K.

Because	 these	 nights	 make	 one	 superstitious,	 and	 because	 one
overestimates	 the	powers	of	 the	once-written	word	and	sees	 the
everlasting	multiplication	of	the	once-recorded	error,	I	must	add
that	 it	 is	 only	 my	 suffering,	 not,	 heavens	 above,	 my	 happiness
that	I	should	like	to	diminish.	But	if	there	is	no	other	way,	then
let	it	be	as	it	is.	How	it	affects	me	to	look	at	you	even	from	afar!

May	23,	1913
My	Felice,	my	dearest,	now	I	have	failed	to	answer	one	of	your	letters
promptly.	Did	 you	 really	 think	 that?	 Is	 that	 even	possible?	No,	 it	 is
not	 possible,	 for	 a	 letter	 from	 you	 gives	me	 such	 joy	 that	 I	 cannot
refrain	 from	 answering	 at	 once,	 no	matter	 how	 bad	 things	with	me
may	be,	and	even	when	I	know	it	would	be	more	sensible	not	to	write.
But	just	imagine,	that	letter	you	mailed	on	Sunday	did	not	reach	me
until	 today,	 Friday.	 A	 postmark	 shows	 that	 it	 had	 been	 to	 Vienna.
While	 I	 was	 tormenting	 myself	 here,	 this	 letter,	 owing	 to	 some
inefficient	clerk,	was	on	its	way	to	Vienna	and	slowly	back	again.	And
in	the	course	of	these	long	days	I	thought:	Felice	is	not	answering	my
most	important	letter,	is	not	answering	the	question	about	my	letter	to
her	 father,	has	not	written	Sunday,	Monday,	or	Tuesday,	 is	going	 to
Hanover	without	my	being	in	any	way	informed	of	the	purpose	of	this
visit,	is	not	giving	me	her	address	in	Hanover,	hence	has	no	desire	to
hear	 from	me	during	her	 trip,	and	 finally	doesn’t	write	a	word	 from
this	 journey—so	 equally	 I	 could	 not	 write	 to	 you,	 since	 your	 letter
that	 fortunately	 altered	 the	 worst	 assumptions	 did	 not	 arrive	 until
today.	 Those	 were	 not	 pleasant	 days;	 again	 and	 again	 I	 had	 to	 tell



myself	 that	 you	 were	 being	 unintentionally	 cruel	 to	 me,	 and
unintentional	 cruelty	 thus	 prolonged,	 after	 all,	 leaves	 no	 hope
whatsoever.
But	now	things	have	changed,	Felice;	everything	will	turn	out	well,

it	must	turn	out	well.	My	letter	to	your	father	is	not	yet	finished,	or
rather	it	was	finished	several	times,	but	each	time	quite	unsuitable.	It
has	 to	 be	 very	 short	 and	 very	 precise,	 and	 that’s	 not	 easy.	 I	 don’t
intend	 to	hide	behind	your	 father;	 as	 I	 said,	 I	want	 you	 to	 read	 the
letter	first.	But	 it	has	got	to	be	written	and	for	the	following	reason:
There	exist	certain	difficulties	for	me	which	you	are	vaguely	aware	of,
but	which	you	don’t	 take	seriously	enough,	and	which	you	wouldn’t
take	seriously	enough	even	if	you	were	fully	aware	of	them.	No	one	I
know	takes	them	seriously	enough,	or	they	pretend	for	my	sake	not	to
take	 them	 seriously.	 I	 repeat	 what	 has	 been	 said	 often	 before:	 For
about	 10	 years	 I	 have	had	 this	 ever-growing	 feeling	 of	 not	 being	 in
perfect	health;	 the	 sense	of	well-being	 that	 comes	with	good	health,
the	sense	of	well-being	created	by	a	body	that	responds	in	every	way,
a	body	 that	 functions	even	without	constant	attention	and	care,	 this
sense	 of	 well-being	 which	 in	 most	 people	 is	 the	 source	 of	 constant
cheerfulness,	 and	 above	 all	 unselfconsciousness—this	 sense	 of	 well-
being	 I	 lack.	 And	 I	 lack	 it	 in	 every,	 indeed	 in	 every	 single
manifestation	of	life.	And	this	defect	is	not	due	to	any	specific	illness	I
might	have	had;	 on	 the	 contrary,	 apart	 from	children’s	 complaints	 I
have	never	really	been	ill	enough	to	stay	in	bed,	perhaps	not	even	ill
at	all,	in	any	case	I	cannot	remember	any	such	illness.	However,	this
sad	 state	 is	 indeed	 a	 fact,	 it	 is	 apparent	 at	 almost	 all	 times,	 seems
bearable	 enough	 from	 a	 distance,	 can	 be	 overlooked	 by	 friends	 on
occasional	meetings,	is	almost	ignored	in	my	family	by	a	conspiracy	of
silence—but	in	the	most	intimate	relationships?	Just	as	this	condition
prevents	 me	 from	 talking	 naturally,	 eating	 naturally,	 sleeping
naturally,	so	it	prevents	me	from	being	natural	in	any	way.	I	can	think
of	nothing	that	would	not	frighten	me	in	this	respect,	and	with	good
reason	 based	 on	 experience.	 Tell	me,	 can	 I	 really—with	my	 intense
awareness	of	all	this—burden	the	person	I	love	best	with	something	I
try	 to	 spare	 even	 people	 to	whom	 I	 am	 indifferent	 and	with	whom
contact	 is	 limited	both	 in	 time	and	 intensity,	whereas	with	us	 there
would	be	no	 limits?	May	 I	 ask	 you	outright	 to	 grant	me	 a	 heart-to-
heart	talk,	the	need	for	it	is	burning	me	up	because	I	have	kept	silent
about	 it	 for	 so	 long?	May	 I?	 And	 can	 I	 rest	 content	merely	 to	 ask,
when	 I	 see	 the	 change	 that	 comes	 over	 you	 when	 we	 are	 together



(though	this	change	can	hardly	be	said	to	be	in	my	favor,	rather	to	my
disgrace),	 how	 you,	 a	 normally	 self-assured,	 quick-thinking,	 proud
girl,	 are	 seized	 with	 a	 dull	 indifference,	 and	 how	 one	 may	 in	 this
state,	 if	 one	 feels	 but	 a	 glimmer	 of	 responsibility,	 under	 no
circumstances	 demand	 or	 accept	 a	 decision	 affecting	 one’s	 own
destiny,	let	alone	yours?	Oh,	how	heavily	this	conflict	weighed	on	me
that	day	in	Grunewald,	and	for	that	matter,	on	you	too:	to	be	free	to
say	everything,	and	not	to	be	free	to	say	anything!—From	all	of	which
follows:	 I	 cannot	 bear	 the	 responsibility,	 because	 I	 regard	 it	 as	 too
great;	whereas	you	cannot	bear	it,	because	you	are	hardly	aware	of	it.
Miracles,	 of	 course,	 do	 happen;	 the	 fact	 that	 you	 care	 for	 me,	 for
instance,	 is	 one;	 so	 why	 shouldn’t	 my	 salvation	 be	 another	 in	 the
succession	of	miracles	which	life	with	you	would	produce?	My	hopes
in	this	respect	are	not	so	slim	as	not	to	reduce	my	responsibility,	but
the	responsibility	in	itself	is,	and	remains,	too	great.
This	is	why	I	want	to	write	to	your	father	now.	Neither	my	parents

nor	 my	 friends	 could	 give	 me	 adequate	 advice.	 They	 take	 you	 too
little	 into	 consideration,	 and	would	 only	 advise	me	 to	 do	what	 I	 so
obviously	want	 to	 do:	 shoulder	 all	 responsibilities;	 or	 rather	 it’s	 not
that	they	would	advise	me,	they	will	advise	me	(what	I	long	to	hear	is
clearly	written	in	my	eyes,	even	if	I	don’t	say	so),	and	the	first	among
them—in	her	shortsightedness	confined	chiefly	to	the	moment	and	to
me—is	 my	 mother.	 She	 knows	 nothing,	 and	 even	 if	 she	 does,	 her
maternal	 pride	 and	 love	 make	 it	 impossible	 for	 her	 to	 understand;
there	is	no	advice	to	be	had	there.	Your	father	is	the	only	one	who	can
advise,	my	visit	was	very	useful	 in	 this	 respect,	 for	 there	will	be	no
reason	 for	 his	 advice	 to	 be	 prejudiced	 in	my	 favor.	 I	 shall	 tell	 him
what	I	am	telling	you	now,	but	more	clearly,	and—this	sounds	rather
strange,	 and	 is	 in	 fact	 a	 miserable	 expedient	 in	 my	 great	 plight—I
shall	ask	him,	provided	he	doesn’t	turn	me	down	altogether,	to	name
a	physician	whom	he	trusts,	by	whom	I	would	then	allow	myself	to	be
examined.

Franz

From	May	23	to	24,	1913
It	has	got	so	late	owing	to	Max’s	latest	book,	Petticoat	Government;95	I
will	 send	 it	 to	 you	 within	 the	 next	 few	 days.	 It	 includes	 the	 story
“From	 a	 Sewing	 School,”	 of	 which	 I	 knew	 only	 the	 beginning,	 and



which,	 regardless	 of	 time	 and	 lack	 of	 sleep,	 I	 have	 just	 read	 right
through	to	the	end.
Dearest,	how	is	it	that	I	have	been	without	news	of	you	for	so	long?

If	 you	 knew	 how	 I	 squeezed	 everything	 I	 wished	 out	 of	 that	 word
“affectionate”	 in	 your	 telegram,	 though	 it	 was	 only	 a	 conventional
word!	Could	something	 I	 said	 in	my	 last	 letter	have	offended	you?	 I
can	hardly	believe	 it,	 for	even	 if	 it	 is	 silly	and	seemingly	affected	 to
talk	in	general	terms	about	things	of	the	distant	past,	surely	we	know
each	 other	 well	 enough	 for	 you	 to	 realize	 that	 when	 this	 formless
material	has	been	shaped	into	regular	narrative,	not	a	word	of	it	could
offend	you.
But	 could	 your	 trip	 have	 turned	 out	 badly?	 Not	 so	 much	 as	 a

postcard	have	I	received;	and	yet	you	have	surely	written	to	those	at
home,	to	whom	you	returned	on	Friday	and	who	cannot	possibly	have
worried	about	you	as	much	as	I	did.
No	further	reproaches,	my	Felice,	but	never	be	angry	with	me;	there

may	be	cause	for	it,	but	it	is	never	intended.	You	wouldn’t	believe	the
kind	of	person	 I	could	become	if	you	wanted	 it.	 If	only	 the	hand	by
which	I	feel	spiritually	guided	were	held	firmly	in	mine!

Franz

May	 I	 send	 my	 regards	 to	 your	 mother,	 and	 your	 brother	 and
sisters?	 Tell	 your	 mother:	 The	 trip	 had	 both	 meaning	 and
purpose,	but	lacked	the	man	to	accomplish	either.
You	must	have	had	my	express	letter?

[IN	 THE	 LOWER	 LEFT	 MARGIN]	 The	 “announced	 Fräulein	 B.”	 is	wonderful;	 do
send	me	things	from	your	office	occasionally.

May	25,	[1913]
For	heaven’s	sake,	why	on	earth	don’t	you	write	 to	me?	Not	a	word
for	a	whole	week.	It	really	is	dreadful.

May	27,	1913
So	this	is	the	end,	Felice;	you	dismiss	me	with	your	silence,	and	put	an
end	to	all	hope	for	the	only	kind	of	happiness	I	am	capable	of	in	this
world.	But	why	this	terrible	silence,	why	not	an	honest	word,	why	for



weeks	past	have	you	been	noticeably,	 so	awfully	noticeably,	 fretting
about	me?	It	is	no	longer	compassion	on	your	part,	for	even	if	I	were
an	 utter	 stranger,	 you	 couldn’t	 help	 realizing	 that	 the	 uncertainty
makes	me	suffer	so	much	that	at	times	I	am	almost	out	of	my	mind;
nor	 can	 it	 be	 compassion	 if	 it	 ends	 in	 this	 silence.	 Nature	 takes	 its
course,	nothing	can	be	done	about	it,	the	more	I	came	to	know	you,
the	 more	 I	 loved	 you,	 the	 more	 you	 came	 to	 know	 me,	 the	 more
insufferable	you	thought	me.	 If	only	you	had	realized	 it,	 if	only	you
had	said	 so	openly,	 if	only	you	had	not	delayed	until	 it	has	become
impossible	 for	 you,	 until	 you	 can	 no	 longer	 bring	 yourself	 to	 write
even	 one	 single	 word	 from	 a	 five-day	 trip,	 or	 reply	 with	 even	 one
single	line	to	letters	in	which	I	ask	for	a	decision,	or,	in	my	misery	at
not	having	heard	from	you	for	so	long,	find	some	way	of	comforting
me.	Yet	even	yesterday	when	I	called	you	to	the	telephone	you	said,
though	I	caught	but	very	 little,	 for	owing	to	 the	 joy	at	hearing	your
voice	there	was	too	much	buzzing	in	my	ears:	You	had	written	to	me
on	Sunday	evening,	 and	 today,	Tuesday,	 at	 latest,	 your	 letter	would
be	at	the	apartment.	No,	nothing	came;	you	wrote	neither	on	Sunday,
nor	 even	 on	 Monday	 after	 the	 telephone	 conversation;	 you	 cannot
write,	 but	 you	 also	 cannot	 say	 that	 you	 cannot	 write.	 Now	when	 I
think	that	the	only	spontaneous	thing	you	said	to	me	yesterday	was	to
ask	me	how	I	am,	then	really	my	mind	becomes	unhinged.	I	cannot	go
on	living	in	this	way.	It	is	probably	no	longer	necessary	to	urge	you,
yet	I	do	ask	you	explicitly	not	to	write	to	me	any	more,	not	a	word;	do
as	 your	 heart	 bids.	 I	 shan’t	 write	 to	 you	 either;	 there	 will	 be	 no
reproaches;	 you	 won’t	 be	 troubled	 any	 more,	 and	 there	 is	 but	 one
thing	 I	 ask	 you	 to	 remember:	 no	 matter	 how	 long	 the	 silence	 is
preserved,	 in	 response	 to	 the	 faintest	 but	 genuine	 appeal	 I	 am	 yours,
today	as	always.

Franz

May	28,	1913
No,	I	am	not	anxious,	Felice;	that	is	not	the	right	word.	But	you	don’t
want	me,	you	don’t	want	me,	nothing	could	be	more	obvious;	but	 if
after	all	you	do	want	me,	 then	 this	wish	 remains	completely	hidden
by	its	half	heartedness.	To	feel	 I	am	holding	your	hand	while	for	10
days	 you	 keep	 entirely	 aloof—this	 I	 cannot	 bear.	 I	 endured	 the
Frankfurt	 silence	without	 receiving	 from	you	any	 explanation	 for	 it;



this	latest	silence	is	too	much	for	me,	and	so	it	would	be	for	someone
10	times	more	robust.	I	have	no	wish	to	spell	out	all	the	other	things
that	support	my	interpretation,	though	in	the	end	I	have	to	admit	that
I	do	not	understand	you.	 I	have	done	you	an	 injustice;	 you	actually
did	write	on	Sunday	evening	 (I	 didn’t	 get	 the	 letter	until	 today,	 the
post	office	official’s	hands	must	be	as	unsteady	as	my	own),	but	 the
contents	of	the	letter	cancel	my	injustice.	In	the	letter	you	received	on
Monday	I	let	out	a	cry	of	despair;	you	had	nothing	to	write.	Tuesday
—again	nothing,	and	I	have	good	reason	to	believe	that	a	letter	from
Max	was	responsible	for	today’s	telegram.	There	is	no	alternative	but
to	take	my	leave	which,	between	the	lines	of	your	letters,	and	in	the
intervals	between	these	letters,	you	gave	me	long	ago.	I	repeat,	Felice:
I	 am	 wholly	 yours,	 you	 could	 never	 have	 possessed	 anything	 so
completely,	but	within	this	relationship	of	ours,	as	it	 is	now	and	has
been	 for	 the	 past	weeks,	 I	 can	 no	 longer	 be	 yours,	 for	 it	 cannot	 be
your	 true	self	 that	wants	 to	continue	 this	kind	of	 relationship	which
merely	 makes	 you	 suffer—for	 you	 are	 certainly	 not	 cruel—and	 in
which	I	feel	hounded	to	death.	This	is	what	I	still	had	to	tell	you.

Franz

June	1,	1913
What	will	become	of	us,	my	poor	dearest?	You	know,	if	Löwy	weren’t
here	 and	 I	 didn’t	 have	 to	organize	 a	 recital96	 for	 the	poor	 fellow	 (a
notice,	 suggested	 by	me	 and	written	 by	Pick,	 is	 enclosed,	 and	 there
are	other	things	of	this	kind	to	be	done),	and	didn’t	have	to	sell	tickets
and	 busy	myself	 about	 the	 hall,	 and	 finally	 if	 Löwy’s	 unquenchable
fire	 hadn’t	 infected	 me	 and	 given	 me	 a	 semblance	 of	 speed	 and
activity—I	don’t	know	how	I	should	have	got	 through	these	 last	 few
days.	 After	 all,	 we	 do	 belong	 together,	 there	 seems	 to	 be	 no	 doubt
about	 that,	 but	 equally	 there	 is	 no	 doubt	 that	 we	 are	 immensely
different,	 that	 you	 are	healthy	 in	 every	 sense	of	 the	word,	 and	 as	 a
result	calm	in	your	innermost	being;	whereas	I	am	ill,	perhaps	not	so
much	in	the	generally	accepted	sense,	but	consequently	 in	the	worst
possible	 sense	 of	 the	 word,	 hence	 I	 am	 restive,	 absentminded,	 and
listless.	 There	 are	 undoubtedly	 differences	 between	 your	 first	 letters
and	those	of	the	past	few	weeks,	but	these	differences	may	not	be	as
significant	as	 I	 think,	and	 the	reason	 for	 them	may	not	be	 the	one	 I
thought	 I	 had	 detected.	 Your	 behavior	 toward	me	may	 also	 have	 a



reason	other	than	the	one	I	am	able	to	recognize,	or	rather	not	may,
but	 has,	 since	 you	 say	 so	 yourself.	 That’s	 the	way	 it	 is,	 I	make	 you
suffer	and	yet,	 as	you	 say,	you	are	quite	 satisfied	with	me,	and	you
make	me	suffer	and	yet	I	want	you	to	be	exactly	as	you	are	and	not	a
shade	different.	 For	 example,	 remember	 that	 letter	you	wrote	 to	me
from	the	zoological	gardens.	That	wasn’t	a	letter,	that	was	a	ghost	of	a
letter.	 I	 know	 it	 almost	 by	 heart.	 “We	 are	 all	 here,	 sitting	 in	 the
restaurant	at	the	zoo,	after	spending	the	entire	afternoon	sitting	in	the
zoo.”	But	why	on	earth,	why	did	you	have	to	sit	in	the	zoo?	After	all,
you	 are	 not	 a	 slave.	 You	might	 have	 had	 a	 rest	 at	 home	 after	 your
journey,	 and	 sent	me	5	peaceful	 lines.	 “I	 am	now	writing	under	 the
table,	 while	 discussing	 traveling	 plans	 for	 next	 summer.”	 So	 these
lines,	 the	 first	 after	 an	 interval	 of	 a	 week,	 you	 have	 to	 write	 in
unimaginable	 circumstances,	 which	 moreover	 almost	 imply	 a
reproach	to	me	for	wanting	to	hear	from	you	after	a	whole	week.	And
then	 you	 mail	 the	 letter	 without	 a	 stamp,	 so	 that	 it	 takes	 3	 days
longer,	 and	 think	 you	 needn’t	 bother	 to	 write	 again	 for	 another	 3
days.—Now	 I	 wanted	 to	 say	 something	 loving;	 deep	 within	 me	 is
nothing	but	love	for	you,	yet	bitterness	still	obtrudes.	If	only	it	were
tears,	and	we	were	in	each	other’s	arms!

Franz

[June	2,	1913]
Löwy	 is	 sitting	behind	me,	 reading.	No,	Felice,	 it	 is	not	 that	 I	didn’t
write	 to	 you	 because	 he	 took	 up	 too	much	 of	my	 time,	what	 could
take	up	my	time	to	the	extent	of	banishing	all	thought	of	you?	But	I
was	waiting	for	your	letter.	How	I	wish	I	could	swear	to	you	that	we’ll
write	to	each	other	calmly	from	now	on,	without	allowing	anything	to
upset	us,	but	I	cannot	vouch	for	myself.	And	now,	dearest,	suppose—
though	it	may	not	be	a	certainty—suppose	 it	 is	not	 just	 the	distance
that	makes	me	what	 I	am,	but	 that	 I	am	the	same,	and	permanently
so,	also	at	close	quarters,	only	rather	more	desperate	on	the	one	hand,
and	 rather	 more	 weary	 on	 the	 other.	 And	 as	 I	 ponder	 all	 this,	 my
thoughts	return	constantly	to	my	letter	to	your	father.
Dearest	Felice,	please	write	and	tell	me	about	yourself,	as	in	the	old
days,	 about	 the	 office,	 about	 your	 friends,	 your	 family,	 your	walks,
about	books;	you	have	no	idea	how	important	it	is	to	my	life.
Can	 you	 discover	 any	 meaning	 in	 the	 “Judgment”—some



straightforward,	coherent	meaning	that	one	could	follow?	I	can’t	find
any,	 nor	 can	 I	 explain	 anything	 in	 it.	 But	 there	 are	 a	 number	 of
strange	 things	 about	 it.	 Just	 look	 at	 the	 names!	 It	was	written	 at	 a
time	when	I	had	not	yet	written	to	you,97	though	I	had	met	you	and
the	world	had	grown	in	value	owing	to	your	existence.	Now	note	this.
Georg	has	the	same	number	of	letters	as	Franz,	“Bendemann”	is	made
up	 of	 Bende	 and	 Mann,	 Bende	 has	 the	 same	 number	 of	 letters	 as
Kafka,	and	the	two	vowels	are	also	in	the	same	place;	out	of	pity	for
poor	 “Bende,”	 “Mann”	 is	 probably	 meant	 to	 fortify	 him	 for	 his
struggles.	 “Frieda”	 has	 the	 same	 number	 of	 letters	 as	 Felice;	 it	 also
starts	 with	 the	 same	 letter;	 “Friede”	 and	 “Glück”	 are	 also	 closely
related;	 “Brandenfeld,”	 owing	 to	 “feld,”	 has	 some	 connection	 with
“Bauer,”	 and	 also	 starts	with	 the	 same	 letter.98	 And	 there	 are	 other
similar	 things—all	 of	 which,	 needless	 to	 say,	 I	 only	 discovered
afterwards.	The	whole	thing,	incidentally,	was	written	during	a	single
night,	from	11	to	6	in	the	morning.	When	I	sat	down	to	write,	after	a
Sunday	 so	miserable	 I	 could	 have	 screamed	 (I	 had	 spent	 the	 entire
afternoon	 silently	 circling	 around	my	brother-in-law’s	 relatives,	who
were	 on	 their	 first	 visit	 to	 us),	 I	meant	 to	 describe	 a	war;	 from	 his
window	a	young	man	was	 to	 see	a	vast	 crowd	advancing	across	 the
bridge,	but	then	the	whole	thing	turned	in	my	hands	into	something
else.—	 And	 one	 more	 thing:	 The	 final	 word	 in	 the	 penultimate
sentence	should	read	“drop,”	not	“fall.”99	And	now,	is	all	well	again?

Franz

June	[6	and]	7,	1913
Well,	 Felice,	 just	 look	 how	 sad	 this	 is.	 On	 Monday	 you	 wrote	 that
from	now	on	you	intend	to	write	every	day	again.	I	got	that	letter	on
Tuesday;	by	Wednesday	you	had	my	answer.	It	is	now	Friday	evening
and	 I	 still	 haven’t	 had	 a	 line.	 Have	 I	 not	 reason	 to	 regret	 that	 you
intend	to	write	“not	out	of	compassion”	but	for	some	other	reason,	for
if	you	wrote	out	of	compassion,	I	should	have	had	the	letter	long	ago.
Again	and	again	you	make	promises	you	are	unable	 to	keep.	This	 is
surely	not	like	you.

Franz

[The	next	day,	June	7,	1913]



On	leaving	home	this	morning	I	left	the	letter	behind	(I	have	to	rush
off	in	a	hurry	nowadays	because	my	parents	are	in	Franzensbad	and	I
have	to	go	to	the	shop	in	the	morning	as	well	as	in	the	afternoon,	and
now	Ottla	has	gone	 to	bed	with	a	sore	 throat—but	why	am	I	 telling
you	this?	To	try	and	influence	you	even	in	this	way?	No,	that’s	not	the
reason;	the	less	so,	since	I	know	it	would	be	useless).	Then	again	I	was
glad	I	hadn’t	mailed	it	this	morning,	for	something	was	sure	to	arrive
today.	Nothing	came.	I	am	telling	you	this	as	though	you	didn’t	know.
But	you	do	know,	and	intend	it	to	be	so.	I	no	longer	even	consider	the
possibility	 of	 a	 letter	 having	 gone	 astray.	 Letters	 that	 have	 been
written	do	not	go	astray,	the	only	letters	that	go	astray	are	those	that
have	 never	 been	 written.	 But	 why?	 Why?	 Why	 torment	 me	 so
unnecessarily?

June	7,	1913
Now	at	11:30	 P.M.	 I	have	come	back	 from	an	excursion,	and	 there	 is
the	letter	I	have	been	expecting,	or	rather	no	longer	expecting.	So	one
of	your	letters	has	really	gone	astray,	and	here	I	have	been	tormenting
myself	 for	 weeks	 owing	 to	 its	 nonarrival.	 And	 what	 kind	 of	 ghosts
have	appeared	to	you	in	the	meantime	to	unseal	your	lips?	Yes,	I	shall
write	 more	 fully	 about	 this	 tomorrow;	 meanwhile	 I	 must	 be	 happy
that	these	lips,	which	in	truth,	today	and	always,	I	dare	and	can	kiss
only	 from	 afar,	 have	 still	 got	 some	 kind	 words	 for	 me.	 And	 now
goodnight.	Your	doubts	do	not	mean	a	retreat,	or	do	they?	How	glad	I
am	 that	 you	 talk	 at	 all,	 even	 if	 you	 fail	 to	 mention	 what	 in	 fact,
unbeknown	to	you,	most	occupies	your	mind.	But	the	opening	words
are	 spoken,	 and	with	 them	we	must	 conjure	up	 the	 others,	 so	 as	 to
become	 entirely	 free	 to	make	 the	 right	 decision.	 And	 now	 to	 sleep.
No,	I	still	am	unable	to	sleep,	more	and	more	so.	But	maybe	today.

Franz

What	was	in	the	lost	letter?	And	address	the	letters	with	greater
care!
Some	day	I	should	like	to	send	your	sister	Erna	my	regards;	will
you	let	me	have	her	address.

June	10,	1913



You	are	ill,	and	yet	still	running	about?	Better	if	you	didn’t	go	to	the
doctor	but	stayed	at	home	and	rested.	I	wish	I	could	look	after	you.
In	any	case,	we	both	need	a	rest;	what	would	be	more	natural	than
that	we,	who	both	have	the	same	need,	should	go	to	the	same	place?
You	shouldn’t	ask	whether	 I	 love	you.	Sometimes	 I	 feel	as	 though
everything,	everything	were	deserted,	and	you	alone	were	sitting	on
the	ruins	of	Berlin.
I	 must	 admit	 your	 letter	 of	 Friday	 is	 not	 yet	 answered,	 but	 in
answer	 to	 it	 I	 am	 preparing	 a	 treatise	 which	 is	 not	 yet	 ready.	 Not
actually	from	lack	of	time,	but	from	weakness	and	an	unsteadiness	of
the	head	which	has	been	refusing	to	obey	for	a	long	time.
By	a	coincidence	the	notice	about	Löwy	is	lying	in	front	of	me,	and
here	it	is.100	The	recital	went	off	rather	badly,	but	at	least	Löwy	has	a
little	money	now,	 there	 is	no	other	way	of	helping	him	at	present.	 I
should	like	to	let	you	listen	to	him	talking.	He	is	better	at	that	than	at
any	 reading,	 reciting,	 or	 singing;	 at	 such	 moments	 his	 fire	 is
infectious.
The	“Judgment”	cannot	be	explained.	Perhaps	one	day	I’ll	show	you
some	 entries	 in	my	 diary	 about	 it.	 The	 story	 is	 full	 of	 abstractions,
though	 they	 are	 never	 admitted.	 The	 friend	 is	 hardly	 a	 real	 person,
perhaps	he	is	more	whatever	the	father	and	Georg	have	in	common.
The	 story	may	be	a	 journey	around	 father	 and	 son,	 and	 the	 friend’s
changing	 shape	may	 be	 a	 change	 in	 perspective	 in	 the	 relationship
between	father	and	son.	But	I	am	not	quite	sure	of	this,	either.
Today	I	am	sending	you	the	Stoker.	Receive	the	little	lad	kindly,	sit
him	down	beside	you	and	praise	him,	as	he	longs	for	you	to	do.
Tomorrow	 I	 expect	 an	 accurate	 report	 about	 the	 silly	 things	 the
doctor	 said.	By	 the	way,	who	 is	he?	Your	 family	doctor?	What’s	his
name?
Look,	I	don’t	want	this	letter	to	prevent	you	from	coming	to	Prague.
Come,	just	come!	You	are	so	eagerly	expected.

Franz

June	13,	1913
Such	 is	 my	 indecision	 I	 can	 barely	 move	 my	 hand	 to	 write.	 Your
letters	once	again	at	a	standstill,	as	indeed	they	have	been	continually
for	months.	Just	as	for	months	past	my	letters	have	been	an	appeal	for
news,	 as	 though	 you	were	 a	 complete	 stranger	who	 cannot	 possibly



imagine	 the	 sufferings	 of	 someone	 waiting	 for	 news.	 And	 this
standstill	was	always	your	doing,	though	perhaps	not	your	fault.	And
here	it	is	again.	Could	you	be	ill,	as	you	implied	before?	Even	that,	I
couldn’t	 consider	 seriously	 now.	 I	 remember	 how	 once	 in	 the	 early
days	I	sent	a	telegram	to	your	home	asking,	“Are	you	ill?”—by	which
I	merely	made	 a	 fool	 of	myself.	 And	 how	 the	 other	 day	 I	waited	 2
hours	 for	 a	 telephone	 connection,	 and	meanwhile,	 in	 the	miserable
waiting	 room	 of	 some	 miserable	 post	 office,	 composed	 a	 letter	 by
which	I	meant	to	touch	your	mother’s	heart	and	force	her	to	give	me
some	news	about	your	state	of	health—and	how	finally	I	heard	your
strong	 clear	 voice,	 and	 your	 innocent	 question:	 “How	 are	 you?”	All
morning	I	have	been	thinking	of	sending	a	telegram	to	Fräulein	Brühl,
and	yet	probably	won’t	do	so.
Please,	please	Felice,	if	you	are	well,	do	write	a	line.	But	of	course	if

you	are	ill—which	after	all	is	possible;	I	gave	up	trusting	my	intuitive
powers	long	ago—then	what?	Indeed	I	don’t	know.	Then	I	shall	be	left
with	 my	 anxiety	 and	 my	 fears,	 for	 how	 could	 I	 hope	 to	 achieve
anything	with	my	wishes,	 since	 I	 cannot	 do	 so	with	my	 deeds?	 But
even	 then	 I	might	 get	 some	 news,	 perhaps	 through	 your	 sister.	 But
who	am	I	talking	to?	Perhaps	you	won’t	even	get	this	letter,	and	I	may
as	well	leave	it	here	on	my	desk.

Franz

That	was	the	Sunday	letter	I	had	prepared	for	you.	It	was	the	best
I	 could	do.	Now	your	express	 letter,	written	on	Wednesday	and
mailed	on	Friday	evening,	has	just	been	delivered	to	me	in	bed.	I
am	 almost	 satisfied,	 I	 forget	 unpleasantness	 too	 easily.	 What
struck	me	most	was	the	story	about	the	collecting	of	material	and
the	occasional	poet.	Terrible	on	the	one	hand,	but	on	the	other,
oddly	 enough,	 relating	 to	 an	 entirely	 alien	 race.	 What	 strange
customs!

[June	15,	1913]
Dear	Felice,	I	find	it	difficult	to	write	today,	not	because	it	is	late,	but
because	the	letter	that	will	arrive	tomorrow—will	it	in	fact	arrive?—
was	extracted	by	force;	 I	 forced	it	 from	you	with	my	telegram.	Your
guardian	angel	kept	you	 from	writing,	 even	on	 that	endless	Sunday,
and	 I	wrestled	with	 your	 guardian	 angel.	 A	 shameful	 victory—if,	 in
fact,	 it	 is	one.	What	do	 I	want	 from	you?	What	makes	me	persecute



you?	Why	don’t	I	desist,	or	heed	the	signs?	On	the	pretext	of	wanting
to	free	you	of	me,	I	force	myself	upon	you.	Is	there	no	limit,	no	way
out?	 The	moment	 I	 am	 forced	 to	 believe	 that	 you	 are	 lost	 to	me,	 a
simple	optical	 illusion	occurs	at	once,	and	the	somehow-somewhere-
existing,	minute,	barely	visible,	never-to-be-discovered	way	out	takes
on	proportions	of	wondrous	size	and	beauty,	and	once	again	I	plunge
into	pursuit,	and	promptly	stop	short	again.	And	I	experience	not	only
my	own	suffering,	but	even	more	that	which	I	inflict	upon	you.

Franz

June	[10	to]	16,	1913101
Dearest	Felice,	I	have	just	had	a	few	words	with	my	sister,	who	is	in
bed,	and	with	the	governess,	who	is	with	her.	My	sister	 is	good	and
kind,	 the	 governess	 the	most	 devoted	 of	 creatures,	 and	 yet	my	 few
words	were	uttered	with	extreme	irritation,	and	all	I	longed	for	was	to
get	 out	 of	 the	 room	 where	 they	 were	 trying	 to	 detain	 me	 with
questions.	Neither	my	 sister	nor	 the	governess	gave	me	 the	 slightest
cause	 for	 irritation,	 nor	 was	 there	 any	 opportunity	 of	 showing	 my
irritation,	and	so,	 in	 this	abominable	 frame	of	mind,	 I	was	 forced	 to
retreat	to	try	and	find	some	kind	of	purification	by	writing	to	you.	But
even	of	 this	 I	am	uncertain,	 for	 there	was	no	 letter	 from	you	 today,
and	unless	I	can	cling	to	a	recent	word	of	yours,	I	feel	I	am	in	a	void.
Well,	 now	 your	 father	 is	 back	 again,	 and	 the	 letter	 still	 remains

unwritten;	but	then	your	last	letter	is	possibly	the	first	in	a	long	time
in	which	you	ask	me	to	be	“frank	and	honest,”	and	yourself	discard	all
self-consciousness	and	taciturnity.
By	now	you	must	realize	my	peculiar	position.	What	comes	between

you	 and	 me	 is,	 above	 all,	 the	 doctor.	 What	 he	 will	 have	 to	 say	 is
doubtful,	the	medical	diagnosis	is	not	the	most	decisive	factor	in	these
decisions;	if	it	were,	it	wouldn’t	be	worth	obtaining.	As	I	said,	I	have
not	 actually	 been	 ill,	 and	 yet	 I	 am.	 It	 is	 possible	 that	 different
circumstances	 might	 make	 me	 well,	 but	 it	 is	 impossible	 for	 these
different	circumstances	 to	be	created.	The	medical	decision	(which	 I
can	 say	 at	 once	 won’t	 necessarily	 be	 decisive	 for	 me)	 will	 depend
solely	 on	 the	 unknown	 doctor’s	 character.	 My	 family	 doctor,	 for
instance,	 with	 his	 stupid	 irresponsibility,	 wouldn’t	 see	 the	 slightest
objection,	on	the	contrary.	Another	and	better	doctor	might	throw	up
his	hands	in	dismay.



Now	 consider,	 Felice,	 in	 view	 of	 this	 uncertainty,	 it	 is	 difficult	 to
say	the	word,	and	indeed	it	is	bound	to	sound	rather	strange.	Clearly,
it’s	 too	 soon	 to	 say	 it.	 But	 afterwards,	 it	 would	 be	 too	 late:	 there
wouldn’t	be	any	time	to	discuss	matters	of	the	kind	you	mentioned	in
your	 last	 letter.	 But	 there	 also	 isn’t	 time	 for	 endless	 hesitations,	 at
least	this	is	what	I	feel	about	it,	and	so	I	ask:	In	view	of	the	above—
alas,	irremediable—conditions,	will	you	consider	whether	you	wish	to
be	my	wife?	Will	you	do	that?
I	stopped	at	this	point	a	few	days	ago,	and	have	not	resumed	since.
I	can	well	understand	why	 I	was	unable	 to.	Because,	 fundamentally,
this	 is	 a	 criminal	 question	 I	 am	putting	 to	you	 (your	 letter	 of	 today
confirms	 this),	 but	 in	 the	 conflict	 of	 forces,	 those	 that	 have	 to	 pose
this	question	are	victorious.
What	 you	 say	 about	 being	 equals,	 etc.—provided	 it	 is	 not	 a	 cover
(needless	to	say	an	unconscious	one)	 for	other	 things—is	pure	fantasy.	I
am	 nothing,	 absolutely	 nothing.	 I	 am	 “further	 ahead	 in	 every	way”
than	 you?	 Some	 capacity	 for	 understanding	 people,	 and	 for	 putting
myself	in	their	place—this	I	have,	but	I	don’t	believe	I	have	ever	met	a
single	person	who	in	the	long	run	in	his	ordinary	human	relationships,
in	normal	everyday	life	(and	what	else	is	it	all	about?),	could	be	more
hopeless	than	I.	I	have	no	memory,	either	for	things	learned	or	things
read,	either	 for	 things	experienced	or	things	heard,	either	 for	people
or	events;	I	feel	as	though	I	had	experienced	nothing,	learned	nothing,
and	in	fact	I	know	less	about	most	things	than	the	average	schoolboy;
and	 what	 I	 know,	 I	 know	 so	 superficially	 that	 even	 the	 second
question	 is	 beyond	 me.	 I	 am	 unable	 to	 reason,	 my	 reasoning
constantly	 comes	 up	 against	 a	 blank	wall;	 certain	 isolated	matters	 I
can	grasp	in	a	flash,	but	I	am	quite	incapable	of	coherent,	consecutive
reasoning.	Nor	 can	 I	 tell	 a	 story	 properly;	 in	 fact	 I	 can	 hardly	 even
talk;	when	I	am	telling	a	story	I	usually	have	the	kind	of	feeling	small
children	probably	 experience	when	attempting	 their	 first	 steps—not,
however,	because	they	themselves	feel	the	need	to	walk,	but	because
the	 grownups,	 who	 can	 walk	 perfectly,	 expect	 them	 to.	 And	 you,
Felice,	don’t	feel	equal	to	such	a	man,	you	who	are	gay,	lively,	sure	of
yourself,	 and	 healthy?	 All	 I	 possess	 are	 certain	 powers	 which,	 at	 a
depth	almost	inaccessible	under	normal	conditions,	shape	themselves
into	literature,	powers	to	which,	however,	in	my	present	professional
as	well	as	physical	state,	I	dare	not	commit	myself,	because	for	every
inner	 exhortation	 of	 these	 powers	 there	 are	 as	 many,	 if	 not	 more,
inner	 warnings.	 Could	 I	 but	 commit	 myself	 to	 them	 they	 would



undoubtedly,	of	this	I	am	convinced,	lift	me	out	of	my	inner	misery	in
an	instant.
Apropos	the	theoretical	aspect	of	equality—for	in	practice,	as	I	said,
it	doesn’t	arise,	not	at	any	rate	in	your	sense—I	only	want	to	add	that
the	degree	of	 similarity	 in	education,	knowledge,	higher	aspirations,
and	 ideals,	 which	 you	 seem	 to	 demand	 as	 prerequisites	 to	 a	 happy
marriage,	 is	 in	my	opinion	almost	 impossible,	secondly	unimportant,
and	 thirdly	not	even	advantageous	or	desirable.	What	 is	 essential	 to
marriage	 is	 personal	 harmony,	 a	 harmony	 far	 deeper	 than	 that	 of
opinions,	a	harmony	 that	 cannot	be	analyzed	but	only	 felt—i.e.,	 the
necessity	 for	 personal	 proximity.	 But	 this	 doesn’t	 mean	 that	 the
freedom	 of	 either	 party	 is	 in	 any	way	 endangered;	 it	 is	 endangered
only	by	unnecessary	human	proximity	which	constitutes	 the	greatest
part	of	our	lives.
You	say	it	is	conceivable	that	I	might	not	be	able	to	stand	life	with
you.	Here	 you	 almost	 touch	 on	 the	 truth,	 but	 from	 an	 angle	 totally
different	from	the	one	you	have	in	mind.	I	really	do	believe	I	am	lost
to	 all	 social	 intercourse.	 I	 am	 quite	 incapable	 of	 conducting	 a
prolonged,	 vigorously	 developed	 conversation	 with	 any	 individual,
except	 in	 certain	 exceptional,	 appallingly	 exceptional	 cases.	 For
example,	 during	 the	 long	 years	 we	 have	 known	 each	 other	 I	 have,
after	 all,	 been	 alone	with	Max	on	many	occasions,	 for	days	on	 end,
when	traveling	even	for	weeks	on	end	and	almost	continuously,	yet	I
do	not	remember—and	had	it	happened,	I	would	certainly	remember
—ever	having	had	a	 long	coherent	conversation	 involving	my	entire
being,	as	should	inevitably	follow	when	two	people	with	a	great	fund
of	independent	and	lively	ideas	and	experiences	are	thrown	together.
And	monologues	from	Max	(and	many	others)	I	have	heard	in	plenty,
but	what	they	lacked	was	the	vociferous,	and	as	a	rule	even	the	silent,
conversational	partner.
(Dearest,	 it’s	 getting	 late,	 this	 letter	 won’t	 get	mailed;	 that’s	 bad,
and	 what’s	 worse	 is	 that	 it	 hasn’t	 been	 written	 in	 one	 go,	 but
paragraph	by	 paragraph,	 not	 really	 from	 lack	 of	 time,	 but	 owing	 to
restiveness	 and	 self-torture.)	 I	 am	 at	 my	 most	 bearable	 in	 familiar
surroundings	with	2	or	3	friends;	then	I	am	free,	am	not	forced	to	be
continually	 attentive	 and	 cooperative,	 but	 can	 take	 part	 in	 what’s
going	on	if	and	when	I	feel	 like	it,	as	much	or	as	little	as	I	wish;	no
one	misses	me,	no	one	 is	made	uneasy	by	my	presence.	 If	 there	 is	a
stranger	present	who	happens	to	get	under	my	skin,	all	the	better,	for
then,	 on	 borrowed	 strength,	 I	 seem	 to	 be	 able	 to	 become	 quite



animated.	 But	 if	 I	 am	 in	 an	 unfamiliar	 place,	 among	 a	 number	 of
strange	people,	or	people	whom	I	feel	to	be	strangers,	then	the	whole
room	 presses	 on	 my	 chest	 and	 I	 am	 unable	 to	 move,	 my	 whole
personality	 seems	 virtually	 to	 get	 under	 their	 skins,	 and	 everything
becomes	 hopeless.	 This	 was	 what	 happened	 that	 afternoon	 at	 your
house,102	and	the	night	before	last	at	Weltsch’s	uncle’s,	among	people
who,	quite	incomprehensibly,	show	real	fondness	for	me.	I	remember
so	 well,	 I	 was	 leaning	 against	 a	 table,	 the	 daughter	 of	 the	 house
leaned	beside	me—there	isn’t	a	girl	in	Prague	I	like	better—yet	in	the
presence	 of	 these	 good	 friends	 I	 was	 incapable	 of	 uttering	 a	 single
sensible	word.	I	stood	and	stared,	and	every	now	and	again	came	out
with	 something	 nonsensical.	 Had	 I	 been	 tied	 to	 the	 table	 I	 couldn’t
have	looked	more	tormented	and	affected.	A	good	deal	more	could	be
said	about	all	that,	but	this	is	enough	for	the	present.
Accordingly	 one	 might	 think	 I	 had	 been	 born	 to	 solitude—
afterwards,	when	I	 found	myself	alone	in	my	room,	I	was	 in	despair
about	everything,	yet	at	the	same	time	relatively	happy,	and	decided
not	to	see	my	dear	friend	Felix	for	at	least	another	week,	not	by	any
means	from	a	sense	of	shame,	rather	from	sheer	weariness—but	then	I
can’t	 even	 cope	 with	 myself,	 except	 when	 I	 am	 writing.	 True,	 if	 I
behaved	toward	myself	the	way	I	behave	toward	others,	I	should	have
gone	to	pieces	long	ago,	though	I	have	been	close	to	it	many	a	time.
Now	consider,	Felice,	the	change	that	marriage	would	bring	about
for	us,	what	each	would	lose	and	each	would	gain.	I	should	lose	my
(for	the	most	part)	terrible	loneliness,	and	you,	whom	I	love	above	all
others,	would	be	my	gain.	Whereas	you	would	lose	the	life	you	have
lived	hitherto,	with	which	you	were	almost	completely	satisfied.	You
would	 lose	 Berlin,	 the	 office	 you	 enjoy,	 your	 girl	 friends,	 the	 small
pleasures	of	life,	the	prospect	of	marrying	a	decent,	cheerful,	healthy
man,	 of	 having	 beautiful,	 healthy	 children	 for	 whom,	 if	 you	 think
about	 it,	 you	 clearly	 long.	 In	 place	 of	 these	 incalculable	 losses,	 you
would	 gain	 a	 sick,	 weak,	 unsociable,	 taciturn,	 gloomy,	 stiff,	 almost
hopeless	man	who	possibly	has	but	one	virtue,	which	is	that	he	loves
you.	Instead	of	sacrificing	yourself	for	real	children,	which	would	be
in	accordance	with	your	nature	as	a	healthy	girl,	you	would	have	to
sacrifice	 yourself	 for	 this	 man	 who	 is	 childish,	 but	 childish	 in	 the
worst	 sense,	 and	who	at	 best	might	 learn	 from	you,	 letter	 by	 letter,
the	ways	of	human	speech.	And	you	would	lose	in	all	the	small	things,
all	of	them.	My	income	may	not	be	more	than	yours;	I	have	precisely
4,588	 kronen	 a	 year,	 am	 however	 entitled	 to	 a	 pension,	 but	 my



income,	as	in	any	employment	similar	to	the	civil	service,	can	increase
only	very	slightly;	from	my	parents	I	have	no	great	expectations,	from
literature	none.	So	you	would	have	to	live	far	more	modestly	than	you
do	now.	Would	 you	 really	 do	 this	 and	 stand	 it	 for	my	 sake,	 for	 the
sake	of	the	man	described	above?
And	now,	Felice,	you	speak.	Think	over	everything	I	have	said	in	all
my	 letters	 from	 the	 beginning.	 I	 don’t	 believe	 the	 statements	 about
myself	 could	 ever	 have	 varied	 a	 great	 deal.	 Hardly	 anything	would
have	 been	 exaggerated,	 too	 little	 may	 have	 been	 said	 about	 some
things.	You	need	say	nothing	about	the	external	account,	this	is	plain
enough,	 and	 strictly	 prohibits	 a	 “Yes.”	 What	 remains	 is	 only	 the
internal	account.	How	does	it	stand?	Will	you	reply	in	great	detail?	Or
not	in	great	detail	if	you	haven’t	much	time,	but	clearly,	as	befits	your
basically	clear	nature,	only	slightly	muddied	by	me.

Franz

June	17,	1913
Dearest	 Felice,	 did	 my	 heavy	 letter	 reach	 you?	 I	 was	 very	 careless
with	it.	 I	 left	 the	shop	fairly	 late	 in	the	evening	(my	parents	are	not
coming	back	till	next	week,	Ottla	recovered	long	ago,	the	food	is	the
same	as	usual,	and	I	as	indifferent	to	it	as	ever),	and	as	I	still	wanted
to	mail	 the	 letter	 I	had	 to	go	 to	 the	 station.	But	 I	was	 stopped	by	a
friend	(he	noticed	the	letter	in	my	hand,	asked	what	it	was,	and	I	said
jokingly,	and	indeed	this	was	how	he	took	it,	that	it	was	a	proposal	of
marriage;	one	really	can’t	say	anything	more	unbelievable),	but	then,
if	the	letter	was	to	catch	the	mail,	I	had	to	go	on	to	the	platform.	But
when	I	tried	to	get	a	ticket103	from	a	dispenser,	the	coin	fell	out	again,
for	the	machine	was	empty.	I	was	about	to	try	another	one	when	out
of	the	dark,	empty	first-class	waiting	room	appeared	an	old	man	with
a	 big	 white	 moustache,	 possibly	 but	 not	 necessarily	 a	 railway
employee—I	hardly	looked	at	him	and	certainly	would	not	recognize
him	again—and	offered	to	mail	my	letter,	and,	without	really	waiting
for	me	to	agree,	took	it	and	the	coin;	in	my	embarrassment,	my	most
frequent	state,	 I	 left	everything	to	him.	“Can	I	really	rely	on	you?”	I
added,	half-asleep,	but	man	and	letter	had	disappeared.
I	was	happy	 today	with	your	 letter	and	your	postcard	 (everything
arrives	late	at	the	apartment,	I	didn’t	receive	the	postcard	until	noon).
So	you	think	I	have	turned	into	an	erratic	letter	writer?	But	surely	not



on	my	 own?	 No,	 not	 that,	 not	 in	 relation	 to	 you.	 But	 perhaps	 you
think	there	are	altogether	better	means	of	communication	than	letters.
If	 so,	 you	 may	 be	 right,	 though	 not	 necessarily.	 But	 what	 did	 you
mean	the	other	day	when	you	said	that	my	letters	too	had	changed?
In	what	way?	 I	do	want	 to	know.	Unless	you	mean	 from	 the	 time	 I
was	doing	my	own	writing	and	was	a	different	person.
I	don’t	quite	understand	your	vacation	plans.	Do	you	really	have	to

go	 in	 August?	 I	 can	 only	 get	 away	 in	 September.	 And	why	 are	 the
short	journeys	you	have	in	mind	quite	so	expensive?	Are	you	unable
to	travel	cheaply?	You	have	frightened	me	at	times.	The	money	your
hotel	 in	 Prague	 cost,	 for	 instance!	 And	 the	 enormous	 sum	 you
mentioned	as	necessary	for	Palestine!	Can’t	you	travel	3rd	class?104	I,
on	the	other	hand,	can’t	travel	any	other	way.	After	all,	journeys	are
so	cheap;	they	have	to	be,	considering	how	essential	they	are.	Which
is	why	I	advise	you	to	go	to	Lake	Garda,	and	there	I	would	explain	to
you	why.

Franz

June	19,	1913
I	want	to	get	married	and	am	so	weak	that	as	a	result	of	a	little	word
on	a	postcard	my	knees	begin	to	shake.	Shall	I	get	a	letter	tomorrow
from	 which	 I	 can	 conclude	 that	 you	 have	 carefully	 considered
everything	point	by	point,	have	 fully	digested	 it,	and	yet	say	Yes;	 in
other	 words	 that	 you	 have	 not	 denied	 everything	 (that	 would	 be
unfortunate	for,	mark	my	words!	it	is	undeniable)	but	invalidated	and
surmounted	 it,	 or	 by	 virtue	 of	 some	 close	 reasoning	 at	 least	 are
convinced	that	you	are	capable	of	surmounting	it?

Franz

When	did	you	get	my	letter?	Would	you	be	so	kind	as	to	get	me	a
copy	 of	 last	 Monday’s	 issue	 of	 the	 Berlin	 paper	 Deutsche
Montagszeitung.	 I	 am	 told	 there	 is	 something	 in	 it	 about	 the
Stoker.105

[June	20,	1913]
Dear,	 dearest	 Felice,	 not	 that,	 not	 that.	 You	 should	 not	 submit	 to
something	 that	 could	 be	 your	 undoing,	 rather—God	 willing—enter



into	it,	consider	it,	perhaps.	Look	upon	my	present	behavior	as	a	vice
which	I	may	have	overlooked	when	giving	a	description	of	myself;	 I
can’t	 shake	 it	 off.	 The	word	 you	 say	 to	me	 is	 outwardly	 the	 one	 to
which	 I	 want	 to	 dedicate	 my	 life,	 yet	 from	 outside	 I	 cannot	 tell
whether	it	is	the	very	one	I	want.	Meanwhile,	Felice,	I	am	keeping	my
hand	over	your	mouth,	and	meanwhile	the	word	has	not	in	fact	been
spoken,	but	uttered	 into	 the	hollow	of	my	hand.	You	have	not	 fully
appreciated	what	I	wrote	(please,	please,	Felice,	don’t	hold	it	against
me	for	talking	to	you	like	this—I	must,	I	must);	I	cannot	see	that	you
have	 considered	 it	 point	 by	 point,	 you	 have	 considered	 it	 only	 as	 a
whole;	 who	 knows	 what	 you	 may	 have	 missed.	 However,	 you	 did
have	certain	doubts,	though	I	can	see	only	their	traces	(since	you	let	a
day	go	by	before	writing	the	postcard,	and	2	days	before	sending	the
letter);	the	doubts	themselves	are	not	recorded.	What	I	said	about	the
doctor	makes	you	uneasy;	you	don’t	quite	understand	it,	which	is	not
surprising,	 but	 instead	 of	 asking	 questions,	 you	 say	 “let’s	 leave	 it!”
What	I	meant	was	that	the	doctor’s	decision,	even	supposing	it	were
favorable,	would	not	in	itself	automatically	be	my	decision;	more	than
this	I	did	not	say.	You	do	admit	there	were	nasty	things	in	my	letter,
because	“if	I	were	apprehensive	…”	But	dearest,	dearest,	it	is	not	only
courage	 I	 ask	of	you,	or	 rather	 I	do	not	wish	 to	 impose	upon	you	a
task	 that	 requires	 only	 courage.	 For	 courage	 without	 careful
consideration	is	self-sacrifice.	You	believe	everything	I	say;	only	what	I
say	about	myself	you	call	“too	harsh.”	In	that	case	you	don’t	believe
any	part	of	my	 letter,	 for	 it	 is	all	about	me.	What	am	 I	 to	do?	How
make	 the	 incredible	 credible	 to	 you!	 You	 have	 already	 seen,	 heard,
and	put	up	with	me	in	the	flesh.	Not	only	you	but	your	family.	And
still	 you	 do	 not	 believe	me.	 And	 it’s	 a	 question,	 too,	 of	 your	 losing
more	than	just	“Berlin	and	all	 that	goes	with	it”;	but	of	this	you	say
nothing,	 yet	 it	 is	 the	 most	 important.	 “A	 good,	 kind	 husband”?	 I
attached	quite	different	adjectives	to	myself	in	my	last	letter,	but	you
simply	 refuse	 to	 believe	 them.	 Do	 believe	 me;	 consider	 everything
carefully	and	 tell	me	how	 you	have	 considered	 it.	 If	 only	you	had	a
little	time	today,	Sunday,	and	could	write	and	tell	me	in	a	little	more
detail	 how	 you	 visualize	 everyday	 life	 with	 a	man	 such	 as	 the	 one
described	 by	 me?	 Do	 that,	 Felice,	 I	 ask	 you,	 as	 one	 who	 has	 been
pledged	to	you	ever	since	the	first	quarter	of	an	hour.

Franz



June	22,	1913
Dearest,	you	cannot	imagine	the	way	I	squeeze	life	out	of	your	letters,
but	the	careful	consideration,	the	fully	conscious	Yes	is	not	in	them	as
yet,	not	even	 in	your	 last	 letter.	 If	only	 it	 is	 in	 tomorrow’s	 letter,	or
more	particularly	in	your	reply	to	the	one	I	shall	send	tomorrow.	For
tomorrow’s	letter,	which	is	almost	finished,	is	so	important	to	me	that
I’d	 rather	 not	 send	 it	 by	 ordinary	 mail	 today,	 but	 registered,
tomorrow.	Then	a	detailed	reply	to	that	 letter,	 too,	Felice!	Then	this
probing,	 this	very	necessary	probing,	 the	necessity	of	which	you	are
not	 quite	 prepared	 to	 accept,	 may	 be	 over	 for	 the	 time	 being.	 You
surely	don’t	believe,	Felice,	that	I	take	pleasure	in	tormenting	you;	all
right,	 in	 that	 case	 measure	 the	 necessity	 by	 the	 fact	 that	 I	 do	 it
nevertheless.	Answer	tomorrow’s	letter	most	meticulously!
If	Frl.	Brühl	hasn’t	touched	it	up,	then	palmistry	is	a	fine	art—and,
particularly	 in	 the	 case	 of	 the	 prophecy	 about	 “never-going-to-be-
rich,”	alas	incontestable;	but	it	also	contains	a	grave	error.	And	yet,	I
must	 admit	 that	 on	 the	whole	 it	 sounds	wonderful,	 not	wonderfully
accurate,	 but	wonderfully	 pleasant.	Do	 tell	me	more	 about	 it,	won’t
you?
Well,	you	will	get	my	letter	on	Tuesday.	I	should	like	to	keep	you
forever	at	your	desk,	forever	engaged	in	writing	to	me.

Franz

June	21,	[22,	and	23],	1913
Dearest,	 this	 too,	 and	 perhaps	 this	 above	 all,	 you	 do	 not	 take	 into
account	sufficiently	in	your	considerations,	though	we	have	written	a
great	deal	about	 it:	namely,	 that	writing	 is	actually	 the	good	part	of
my	nature.	If	there	is	anything	good	about	me,	it	is	that.	Without	this
world	in	my	head,	this	world	straining	to	be	released,	I	would	never
have	 dared	 to	 think	 of	 wanting	 to	 win	 you.	 It	 is	 not	 so	 much	 a
question	 of	what	 you	 think	 of	my	writing	 now,	 but,	 should	we	 live
together,	you	would	soon	realize	 that	 if	willingly	or	unwillingly	you
do	not	come	to	love	my	writing,	there	would	be	absolutely	nothing	for
you	to	hold	on	to.	In	which	case	you	would	be	terribly	lonely,	Felice;
you	would	not	realize	how	much	I	 love	you,	and	 I	 should	hardly	be
able	to	prove	my	love,	even	though	then	I	might	feel	myself	especially
yours,	 then	as	now.	I	am	slowly	being	pulverized	between	the	office
and	 my	 writing	 (this	 holds	 true	 even	 now,	 though	 I	 have	 written



nothing	 for	 5	 months);	 if	 it	 weren’t	 for	 the	 office,	 then	 of	 course
everything	would	be	different,	and	these	warnings	would	not	have	to
be	 so	 severe,	 but	 as	 things	 are	 I	 do	have	 to	 keep	myself	 in	hand	as
best	 I	 can.	 But	what,	 dearest	 Felice,	 have	 you	 to	 say	 to	 the	 kind	 of
married	 life	 in	which	the	husband,	at	any	rate	 for	several	months	 in
the	year,	returns	from	the	office	at	2:30	or	3,	eats,	 lies	down,	sleeps
until	7	or	8,	hurriedly	has	his	supper,	takes	an	hour’s	walk,	and	then
starts	writing,	and	writes	till	1	or	2?	Could	you	really	stand	that?	To
know	nothing	about	your	husband	except	that	he	is	sitting	in	his	room
writing?	And	 to	 spend	 the	 autumn	 and	winter	 in	 this	way?	And	 by
spring	 be	 ready	 to	 welcome	 the	 man,	 half-dead,	 at	 the	 door	 of	 his
study,	and	through	spring	and	summer	watch	him	trying	to	recover	in
time	for	the	autumn?	Is	that	a	possible	sort	of	life?	Maybe,	maybe	it	is
possible;	nevertheless	you	must	 consider	 it	 carefully	 to	 the	very	 last
shadow	of	doubt.	Nor	should	you	forget	other	peculiarities	connected
with	writing,	but	also	due	to	my	unfortunate	disposition.	For	as	long
as	I	can	remember	it	has	made	me	feel	awkward,	or	at	least	uneasy,	to
have	 a	 stranger	 or	 even	 a	 friend	 in	my	 room;	 you,	 at	 any	 rate,	 like
people,	perhaps	even	parties,	whereas	I	should	have	to	make	a	great,
an	 almost	 painful	 effort	 to	 force	myself	 to	 receive	 relatives	 or	 even
friends	 in	my	or—dare	 I	use	 the	word—our	apartment.	Nothing,	 for
instance,	would	be	easier	for	me	than	to	live	in	Prague	and	never	see
any	of	my	relatives,	 though	they	are	quite	the	kindest	people,	above
all	 in	 their	 kindness	 toward	me,	 and	every	one	of	 them	has	 already
shown	me	more	undeserved	generosity	than	ever	I	could	show	them.
Thus	my	ambition	would	be	to	have	an	apartment,	for	the	time	being,
as	 near	 as	 possible	 to	 the	 outskirts	 of	 the	 town,	 rather	 inaccessible;
and	 my	 further	 ambition	 would	 be—later,	 by	 saving—to	 acquire	 a
small	house	with	a	garden	outside	the	town.	But	just	think,	Felice,	you
would	 then	actually	be	 in	a	position	similar	 to	 that	of	your	sister	 in
Budapest	for	whom	you	feel	so	sorry,	except	that	your	position	would
be	aggravated	by	me,	nor	would	you	have	 the	one	consolation	your
sister	has.	What	have	you	to	say	to	that?	I	need	a	very	explicit	answer
to	this,	you	must	appreciate	that,	a	very	explicit	answer.
I	 know,	 Felice,	 there	 is	 a	 simple	 way	 of	 settling	 these	 questions

quickly	and	favorably—by	not	believing	me,	or	at	least	not	believing
me	as	concerns	the	future,	or	at	least	not	believing	me	entirely.	I	fear
you	are	on	the	point	of	it.	As	a	matter	of	fact	nothing	could	be	worse.
In	 that	 case	 you	 would	 be	 committing	 the	 gravest	 of	 sins	 against
yourself,	 Felice,	 hence	 also	 against	 me.	 It	 would	 mean	 ruin	 for	 us



both.	You	have	to	believe	what	I	say	about	myself;	which	is	the	self-
knowledge	 of	 a	man	 of	 30	who	 for	 deep-seated	 reasons	 has	 several
times	been	close	to	madness,	thus	reaching	the	limits	of	his	existence,
and	so	can	see	all	of	himself	and	what	can	become	of	him	within	these
limits.

June	22
That	was	written	on	Saturday	evening,	it	is	now	Sunday	afternoon;	I
am	 to	 see	 Werfel	 and	 others,	 and	 have	 to	 meet	 my	 parents	 at	 the
station	at	5130.	I	slept	for	only	a	very	short	timed	last	night,	my	head
is	 not	 right,	 I	 don’t	 know	 whether	 I	 shall	 be	 able	 to	 write	 down
everything	properly	the	way	I	want	to.
At	any	rate	you	will	have	to	include	in	your	considerations	the	fact
that	I	am	by	no	means	secure	in	my	position	at	the	office;	the	states	of
despair	 I	 am	 in	 on	 account	 of	 my	 office	 work,	 on	 account	 of	 this
dreadful	 impediment	 to	 my	 life,	 keep	 recurring	 and	 getting	 worse,
because	 the	 strength	 to	 restore	 the	 balance	 is	 constantly	 diminished
by	the	very	impossibility	of	the	task.	Several	times	I	have	been	almost
on	 the	 point	 of	 giving	 notice,	 and	what	 is	 not	 being	 achieved	 by	 a
definite	 decision	 may	 well	 be	 achieved	 automatically	 by	 my
incapacity	to	carry	out	my	work,	which	at	times	has	been	tremendous
and	carefully	noted	by	my	superiors.	But	what	then?
And	even	if	and	as	long	as	I	am	there,	thus	at	best,	a	relative	best,
my	wife	and	I	will	be	a	poor	couple	who	will	have	to	apportion	their
4,588	 kronen	 with	 care.	 We	 shall	 be	 very	 much	 poorer	 than	 my
sisters,	 for	 instance,	 who	 are	 comparatively	 well	 off.	 (I	 can	 expect
nothing	from	my	parents,	at	least	in	their	lifetime.)	We	shall	be	poorer
than	either	Max	or	Oskar.	Won’t	that	embarrass	my	wife	and	for	this
reason,	for	this	reason	alone,	embarrass	me	too?	Will	she	accept	that?
And	should	there	be	exceptional	expenditures	owing	to	illness	or	the
like,	we	would	be	in	debt	at	once.	Will	she	accept	that,	too?
Several	 times	 in	 the	 past	 you	 have	 mentioned	 some	 sorrow	 that
your	 family	 had	 to	 suffer	 and	 accept.	What	 kind	 of	 sorrow	was	 it?
Might	it	serve	as	a	test	of	endurance	for	other	sorrows?

June	23
Monday,	 no	 letter,	 contrary	 to	 all	 expectations.—A	 moment	 ago	 I
followed	 my	 father	 into	 the	 next	 room,	 where	 little	 Felix	 had	 just
woken	 up.	 My	 father	 would	 have	 been	 so	 offended	 if	 I	 had	 not



accompanied	him.	But	how	nauseating	it	is	to	see	the	way	he	carries
on	 with	 that	 child,	 and	 the	 fuss	 they	 all	 make	 of	 it!	 Yesterday
afternoon	when	everyone	 foregathered	here	after	my	parents’	 return
and,	 led	 by	my	 father	 in	 a	 positive	 frenzy,	 the	whole	 family,	while
playing	with	 this	 child,	 lost	 themselves	 in	 the	nethermost	 regions	of
sexuality,	I	 felt	as	revolted	as	if	 I’d	been	condemned	to	live	in	a	sty.
Well	aware	as	I	am	of	my	own	exaggerated	sensitivity	in	this	respect,	I
am	 also	 fully	 conscious	 of	 the	 moral,	 extraordinary,	 and,	 from	 a
distance,	 even	 beautiful	 aspect	 of	 the	 entire	 spectacle.	 But	 there	 of
course,	in	the	midst	of	it,	sat	my	poor	mother	who	has	never	had	the
time	or	ever	learned	how	to	keep	her	body	in	proper	shape,	and	who
is	 now	 bloated	 and	 bent	 from	work	 and	 giving	 birth	 to	 6	 children;
there,	 purple	 in	 the	 face,	 sat	 my	 father,	 whose	 complaint	 was	 not
improved	by	the	quiet	 life	 in	Franzensbad;	 there	sat	my	eldest	sister
who	but	 two	years	ago	was	 still	a	young	girl,	yet	whose	body,	after
producing	 a	 couple	 of	 children,	 is	 now	 really	 beginning,	more	 from
neglect	and	ignorance	than	from	lack	of	time,	to	resemble	that	of	my
mother—and	 there	 she	 sat,	 her	 figure	 bulging	 out	 of	 some
extraordinary	corset.	And	on	closer	scrutiny,	even	my	middle	sister	is
showing	 signs	 of	 looking	 like	 the	 eldest.—Dearest,	 how	 I	 sought
refuge	with	 you!	 But	 you	 never	 even	 thought	 of	me	 yesterday,	 and
never	answered	my	questions,	though	an	answer	is	quite	unavoidable.
And	 I	must	have	 the	answer,	 a	very	precise	answer.	 Just	 as	nothing
you	do	will	ever	offend	me,	so	must	you	never	 feel	offended	by	me;
but	 this	 is	 not	 all:	 you	 also	 mustn’t	 remain	 silent	 out	 of	 sheer
obstinacy	(as	you	once	told	me	you	did	about	Werfel’s	book),	there	is
really	no	 time	 for	 this	now;	and	 finally,	whatever	happens,	don’t	 let
yourself	be	swayed	by	any	information	you	may	have	gathered	from
Max	 that	 time	 in	 Berlin.	 You	must	 listen	 only	 to	 what	 I	 am	 saying
now,	Felice;	you	must	reply	to	this	alone,	but	you	must	answer	it	all,
not	 just	 the	questions.	But	provided	you	do,	one	way	or	 the	other,	 I
promise	 in	return	 that	when	writing	 to	your	parents	asking	 for	your
hand,	 I	 will	 make	 my	 letter	 very	 brief.	 It	 is	 really	 our	 own	 affair
entirely,	but	it	is	you	who	have	to	come	to	terms	with	it.

Franz

June	26,	1913
Dearest	Felice,	when	I	had	read	your	letter	today,	needless	to	say	not



just	once,	our	 situation	 seemed	 to	me	 so	 terrible	 that	 I	 immediately
glanced	 across	 the	 desk	 and	 suggested	 to	my	 colleague,	 that	 absurd
and	 charming	 man	 I	 have	 undoubtedly	 mentioned	 before,	 that	 we
should	 say	 “Du”	 to	 each	 other.	 For	 he	 is	 involved	 in	 a	 love	 affair
which	at	the	moment	is	unhappy	and	in	its	absurdity	typical	of	him,
but	which	 is	 sure	 to	 turn	 out	well	 in	 the	 end.	 And	 so	 he	 is	 always
moaning;	not	only	do	I	have	to	comfort	him,	I	also	have	to	help	him;
and	so	in	this	to	and	fro	of	joy	and	misery	caused	by	your	letter,	in	a
moment	of	utter	helplessness	and	without	 taking	or	wanting	 to	 take
him	further	into	my	confidence	(incidentally,	he	is	immensely	devoted
and	loyal),	 I	offered	him	my	hand	and	proposed	the	“Du.”	It	was	an
exaggerated	gesture	and	I	soon	regretted	it.
I	 am	 not	 in	 the	 right	 frame	 of	mind	 today,	 Felice,	 for	 answering

your	letter	properly;	my	head	aches;	I	have	a	lot	to	say	to	you	and	am
unable	to	summarize	it.	You	do	not	reply	to	all	my	questions,	but	your
answer	 is	 sweet,	 and	 as	 comprehensive	 as	 is	 possible	 for	 you	 at	 the
moment;	more	 I	 cannot	 ask.	Besides,	 some	progress	 has	 been	made,
due	 to	 the	 fact	 that	 through	 these	 letters	 the	 issue	 becomes	 clearer,
and	above	all	more	defined.
I	 have	 not	 written	 to	 you	 now	 for	 2	 days,	 first	 of	 all	 because	 I

wanted	 to	 give	you	 time	and	 leisure	 to	 think,	 and	 secondly	because
Monday’s	letter-card	made	me	unhappy,	by	its	contents	as	well	as	by
the	fact	that	in	it	you	promised	to	write	again	that	evening,	though	I
knew	 in	 advance	 that	 you	wouldn’t,	 and	 in	 fact	 you	 didn’t,	 though
you	have	promised	many	times	in	the	past	to	make	definite	promises
only	for	definite	certainties.
As	far	as	I	can	see	in	my	present	stupid	state,	the	accomplishment	of

our	mutual	 happiness	 depends	 on	 the	 realization	 of	 the	 few	 “ifs”	 in
your	letter.	Yet	how	is	this	to	be	established?	It	is	by	no	means	certain
that	our	being	together	even	for	some	length	of	time	would	be	enough
to	establish	it.	Moreover,	the	possibility	of	our	being	together	for	any
length	of	time	doesn’t	even	exist.	Times	and	places	of	our	vacations	do
not	coincide,	nor	is	Berlin	the	right	place	for	this	being	together.	And
a	 brief	 meeting	 would	 be	 to	 no	 avail	 for	 this	 purpose.	 Actually,
neither	 a	 short	 nor	 a	 long	 time	 is	 enough.	 For	 this	 is	 a	 question
entirely	of	faith,	courage,	and	confidence	on	your	part.	Faith	because,
believe	me,	Felice,	your	assumptions	are	incorrect.	My	attitude	to	my
writing	and	my	attitude	to	people	is	unchangeable;	it	is	a	part	of	my
nature,	and	not	due	to	temporary	circumstances.	What	I	need	for	my
writing	 is	 seclusion,	 not	 “like	 a	 hermit,”	 that	would	 not	 be	 enough,



but	like	the	dead.	Writing,	in	this	sense,	is	a	sleep	deeper	than	that	of
death,	and	just	as	one	would	not	and	cannot	tear	the	dead	from	their
graves,	so	I	must	not	and	cannot	be	torn	from	my	desk	at	night.	This
has	no	immediate	bearing	on	my	relationship	with	people;	it	is	simply
that	I	can	write	only	in	this	regular,	continuous,	and	rigorous	fashion,
and	therefore	can	live	only	in	this	way	too.	But	as	you	say,	for	you	it
will	 be	 “rather	 difficult.”	 I	 have	 always	 had	 this	 fear	 of	 people,	 not
actually	 of	 the	 people	 themselves,	 but	 of	 their	 intrusion	 upon	 my
weak	nature;	for	even	the	most	intimate	friend	to	set	foot	in	my	room
fills	me	with	 terror,	and	 is	more	 than	 just	a	symbol	of	 this	 fear.	But
leaving	 this	aside,	although	 it	cannot	be	 left	aside,	how,	during	 that
autumn	and	winter	life	I	described,	can	people	(let	alone	mother	and
father)	 possibly	 come	 to	 see	 us	 without	 having	 an	 intolerably
disturbing	influence	on	me—and,	if	she	feels	for	me,	also	on	my	wife?
“But	whether	you	are	capable	of	living	in	such	seclusion,	you	do	not
know.”	“Whether	I	could	replace	all	others	for	you,	you	do	not	know.”
Is	this	an	answer,	is	it	a	question?
The	office?	That	one	day	I	shall	be	in	a	position	to	leave	it	is	quite
out	of	the	question.	But	that	I	shall	one	day	be	forced	to	leave	it,	on
account	 of	 being	 unfit	 to	 carry	 on,	 that	 is	 by	 no	means	 out	 of	 the
question.	In	this	respect	my	feeling	of	inner	insecurity	and	anxiety	is
terrible,	 and	 here	 again	 the	 only	 and	 actual	 reason	 for	 it	 is	 my
writing.	My	worries	about	you	and	me	are	the	worries	of	life,	are	part
of	 the	 fabric	 of	 life,	 and	 for	 this	 reason	 would	 ultimately	 be
compatible	with	my	work	at	the	office,	but	writing	and	office	cannot
be	reconciled,	since	writing	has	its	center	of	gravity	in	depth,	whereas
the	office	is	on	the	surface	of	life.	So	it	goes	up	and	down,	and	one	is
bound	to	be	torn	asunder	in	the	process.
The	 one	 thing	 your	 letter	 may	 finally	 have	 eliminated	 is	 my
misgivings	 about	 the	 shortage	 of	 money.	 This	 alone	 would	 be
something.	But	have	you	really	considered	it	carefully?
So	 time	 is	 frittered	away	with	questions.	 I	don’t	 remember	having
written	that	“it	is	very	urgent”	but	that’s	what	I	meant	to	say.

Franz

[IN	 THE	 LEFT-HAND	 MARGIN	 ON	 THE	 LAST	 PAGE]	 The	Montagszeitung?	 If	 there	 is
nothing	in	it	about	the	Stoker	of	course	I	don’t	need	it.



June	27,	1913
I	am	so	miserable,	there	are	so	many	questions,	I	can	see	no	way	out
and	am	so	wretched	and	feeble	that	I	could	lie	forever	on	the	sofa	and
keep	opening	and	closing	my	eyes	without	knowing	the	difference.	 I
can	neither	eat	nor	sleep;	every	day	at	the	office	there	is	exasperation
and	disapproval,	and	I	am	invariably	to	blame;	between	us,	or	rather
not	so	much	between	us	as	ahead	of	us,	things	are	so	unsettled,	and	as
I	 look	out	of	the	window—this	 is	trivial,	yet	pertinent,	 for	I	can	feel
the	 fury	 rising	 in	 my	 throat—I	 can	 see,	 just	 opposite,	 outside	 the
swimming	 baths,	 a	 strange	 youth	 rowing	 around	 in	my	 boat.	 (As	 a
matter	of	fact	this	is	something	I	have	seen	almost	every	day	for	the
past	3	weeks,	since	I	cannot	get	myself	to	replace	the	missing	chain.)
At	 this	particular	moment,	with	 the	squabbles	at	 the	office,	which
are	all	my	fault	and	which,	in	spite	of	every	possible	kindness	from	all
sides,	are	bound	to	recur	at	regular	intervals	and	do	recur,	because	I
am	 incapable	 of	 tidiness	 (I	 lose	 files	 even	 if	 I	 clutch	 them	 in	 both
hands)	 or	 of	 dealing	 with	 a	 case	 for	 which	 I	 happen	 to	 feel	 a
particular	 distaste,	 even	 if	 for	 years	 I	 have	 to	 bear	 the	menace	 that
emanates	 from	 it;	 nor	 can	 I	 conceal,	 prevent,	 or	 justify	 anything,
instead	I	have	to	let	everything	descend	upon	me,	the	way	the	earth
accepts	a	thunderstorm—at	this	particular	moment	(as	I	was	saying),
with	my	obvious	 inability	 to	carry	on	 in	my	present,	 let	alone	 some
future	even	more	responsible	job,	I	feel	bound	to	ask	myself	above	all
whether,	if	only	in	this	respect,	I	have	the	right	to	claim	you,	even	if
you	had	the	courage	to	give	yourself	to	me.
But	 your	 conduct,	 does	 it	 actually	 give	me	 the	 right	 to	 anything?
No,	I	must	find	this	right	within	myself.	In	fact,	what	I	should	really
have	 to	 say	 to	 myself	 is	 that	 I	 can	 derive	 a	 right	 to	 you,	 to	 my
happiness,	 entirely	 from	 my	 own	 assessment	 of	 my	 physical	 and
mental	 condition,	 my	 confidence	 within	 and	 without,	 my	 financial
situation,	 and	 my	 future.	 Should	 my	 own	 assessment	 deny	 me	 this
right—which	 it	 does—where	 would	 I	 acquire	 a	 second	 right?
Certainly	not	from	your	courage,	your	goodness,	nor	even	from	your
love,	even	if	it	isn’t	just	imaginary	(a	possibility	which	you	left	open	in
your	 last	 letter).	This	 right	 I	 could	not	 claim—it	would	be	almost	on
the	borderline	between	a	 right	 and	a	duty—unless	 you	were	 to	 say:
“In	spite	of	everything,	I	cannot	do	otherwise.”	But	by	all	indications
you	 neither	 can	 nor	 should	 say	 it.	 Least	 of	 all	 after	 you	 have	 given
everything	 your	 careful	 consideration.	 Writing	 does	 make	 things



clearer,	yet	at	the	same	time	worse.
Franz

[IN	THE	MARGIN	OF	THE	FIRST	PAGE]	Thank	you	for	the	newspaper.	One	is	tickled
from	head	to	 foot.—I	won’t	be	able	 to	write	 for	Sunday	except	by
express	letter.

June	28,	1913
No	letter	yesterday,	none	today.	This	time	I	can	almost	understand	it.
My	letters	are	becoming	intolerable,	like	my	talking	and	not	talking	in
Nikolassee.106	 What’s	 more,	 I	 am	 beginning	 to	 lose	 my	 sense	 of
perspective,	 and	 could	 be	 fully	 occupied	 attending	 to	 the	 throbbing
and	 aching	 in	my	 temples;	 for	 everything	 else	 I	 am	 useless.	 At	 the
office	it	was	even	worse	than	yesterday.
Yesterday	 afternoon,	 toward	 evening,	 after	 6	 o’clock,	 I	 sat	 on	 the

sofa	 gazing	 at	 the	 room	with	 a	 vacant	 stare.	My	 sister,	 having	 just
returned	 from	the	 shop,	opened	my	door	and	stood	 there.	Somehow
or	 other	 she	 has	 felt	 sorry	 for	me	 lately,	 is	 aware	 that	 I	 have	 been
eating	practically	nothing,	and	now	wanted	to	know	if	I	was	going	to
have	any	supper.	But	feeling	no	desire	to	talk,	I	just	turned	and	stared
at	 her,	 she	 stared	 back,	 and	 this	 went	 on	 for	 quite	 a	 while.	 All	 I
wondered	was	how	it	would	be	if	 instead	of	my	sister	my	wife	were
standing	 in	 the	door	 faced	with	 this	 sight,	 and	 compelled	 to	put	up
with	it.
At	 lunchtime	 today	 my	 mother	 said:	 “I	 know	 you	 are	 worried.	 I

don’t	 want	 to	 pry	 into	 your	 secrets,	 but	 I	 would	 so	 like	 you	 to	 be
contented,	 etc.”	 And	 later	 at	 some	 utterly	 inappropriate	 moment:
“You	have	no	idea	how	much	your	father	cares	for	you,	etc.”	I	said	all
I	could	say:	“But	I	have	no	worries,	only	troubles	at	the	office.”	That
was	the	end	of	it,	but	I	know	that	whenever	she	can,	she	starts	talking
to	 my	 sister	 about	 you	 and	 me.	 When	 dealing	 with	 me,	 her
helplessness	is	almost	as	great	as	my	own.
But	 I	 won’t	 go	 on,	 I	 don’t	 want	 to	 spoil	 your	 Sunday	 by	 writing

more,	as	would	be	inevitable.	I	can	think	of	nothing	but	sad	things.	I
would	 like	 to	explain	 this	by	 the	 fact	 that	 I	have	had	no	 letter	 from
you	today;	but	it	isn’t	only	that.	At	least	be	kind	to	this	piece	of	paper,
Felice	(how	the	F	pushed	itself	into	my	pen);	fondle	it	for	a	moment;
the	thought	of	it	will	make	me	feel	better.



Franz

June	29,	1913
Nothing?	You	had	 letters	 from	me	on	both	Friday	and	Saturday,	yet
you	don’t	write	 a	 single	word?	 It	was	my	 turn	 to	be	on	duty	at	 the
office	today,	Sunday.	I	got	home	a	moment	ago	(my	family	are	in	the
country);	while	opening	the	door	my	heart	beat	not	as	though	I	were
about	 to	 find	 the	 expected,	 the	 confidently	 expected	 letter,	 but	 as
though	I	were	about	to	meet	the	dearest	human	being	in	the	flesh—
and	there	is	nothing.	This	must	have	some	significance,	I	tell	myself,
and	it	isn’t	difficult	to	work	it	out.

Franz

July	1,	1913
My	dearest	Felice,	you	are	right,	my	mother	has	 just	handed	me	the
information.	 It	 is	 an	 elaborate	 document,	 as	 gruesome	 as	 it	 is
intensely	funny.	We	shall	laugh	about	it	one	day.	I	knew	my	mother
had	 procured	 it,	 for	 on	 the	 evening	 of	 the	 day	 your	 last	 telegram
arrived	I	let	my	mother	read	the	letter	I	had	prepared	for	your	father.
Now	she	thought	there	was	no	time	to	be	lost	and,	without	consulting
me,	 sent	 for	 the	 information,	undoubtedly	with	 the	proviso	 that	you
were	not	to	know	anything	about	it.	Next	day	she	admitted	it	to	me;	I
didn’t	take	it	very	seriously	and	thought	no	more	about	it.	Now	it	has
arrived;	 it	 reads	 as	 though	written	 by	 someone	who	 is	 in	 love	with
you.	 Yet	 not	 a	 word	 of	 it	 is	 true.	 Nothing	 but	 stock	 answers.	 True
answers	are	probably	unobtainable	anyway,	even	 if	 the	agency	were
actually	capable	of	discovering	the	truth.	Nevertheless	it	reassures	my
parents	 a	 thousand	 times	 more	 than	 anything	 I	 say.—Imagine,	 the
informant	even	tells	barefaced	lies—to	your	advantage,	as	he	seems	to
think.	What	 do	 you	 think	 “one	hears	 particularly”	 about	 you?	 “One
hears	particularly	that	you	are	an	able	cook.”	Well,	I	never!	Needless
to	say,	he	is	quite	unaware	that	this	would	be	no	good	to	you	in	our
household,	 or	 at	 least	 that	 you	would	 have	 to	 relearn	 everything.	 I
don’t	 know,	 but	 I	 do	 think—I	 was	 interrupted	 and	 have	 only	 got
another	 moment—I	 do	 think	 our	 diet	 will	 be	 a	 vegetarian	 one,	 or
don’t	you?	You	dear	cook,	about	whose	culinary	cleverness	“one	hears
particularly.”
I	feel	rotten;	I	shall	fall	apart,	unless	they	can	put	me	together	again



down	south.	 I	 can’t	come	 to	Westerland,107	my	chief	 is	on	vacation,
and	 even	 if	 I	 had	 a	 vacation,	 I	 doubt	 that	 I	would	 come;	my	 entire
vacation	has	 to	 be	 devoted	 to	 regaining	 a	 little	 strength,	 if	 only	 for
your	sake.—What	is	your	idea	about	the	sequence	of	events:	my	letter
to	 your	 father,	 followed	 by	my	 father’s	 visit?	Or	 shall	we	 leave	my
father	out	altogether?	You	have	plenty	of	time	to	think	about	it.	And
try	to	recover	from	me,	but	not	completely.

Franz

July	3,	1913
[Kafka’s	30th	birthday]

I	wrote	and	told	you	everything,	Felice,	that	came	into	my	mind	at	the
time	of	writing.	It	is	not	everything,	yet	with	some	perception	one	can
sense	almost	everything.	And	still	you	are	prepared	 to	 risk	 it;	 either
you	 are	 absurdly	 bold,	 or	 else	 have	 intimations	 of	 whatever	 holds
sway	 over	 us	 that	 I	 lack.	 I	 no	 longer	 doubt	 that	 you	 believe	 me,
although	you	are	slightly	evasive	even	 in	 today’s	 letter	 (letters	don’t
allow	one	 to	 keep	 a	 sufficient	 hold	 of	 each	other	without	 becoming
crude).	I	don’t	doubt	that	you	believe	me,	for	if	I	did	you	would	not
be	the	one	I	love,	and	nothing	would	be	free	of	doubt.	No,	from	now
on	then,	we	shall	hold	on	to	each	other	and	join	hands	properly.	Do
you	 still	 remember	my	 long	 bony	 hand	with	 fingers	 like	 those	 of	 a
child	and	an	ape?	And	you	join	yours	to	that.
I’m	not	 saying	 that	 I	 am	happy;	 I	have	 too	much	anxiety	and	 too
many	worries;	anyway	I	may	be	quite	incapable	of	human	happiness,
and	 the	 phenomenon	 that	 (your	 telegram	 has	 just	 arrived,	 I	 keep
staring	at	it	as	if	it	were	a	face,	the	only	face	I	know	and	want	among
all	 human	 kind)	 that	 you,	 with	 whom	 I	 felt	 a	 bond	 from	 the	 first
evening,	 that	 you	 and	 I	 should	 now	 be	 completely	 united,	 is	 really
inconceivable;	it	makes	me	want	to	lean	against	your	breast	with	eyes
closed.
You	have	showered	me	with	gifts.	The	fortitude	with	which	I	have
endured	 these	 30	 years	 deserves	 the	 gifts,	 but	 the	 result	 of	 these
efforts,	 my	 existence,	 really	 does	 not	 deserve	 them,	 as	 you	 will
discover,	Felice.	Unless	today	happens	to	be	a	great	birthday,	and	life,
without	losing	what	has	been	gained,	is	taking	at	this	hour	a	special
turn	around	its	axis.
At	 lunch	 today,	 in	 response	 to	 her	 birthday	 wishes,	 I	 told	 my



mother	 (very	 briefly,	 she	 is	 never	 at	 home	 for	 long	 and	 has	 always
finished	her	meal	by	the	time	I	arrive;	my	father	went	to	the	country
this	morning)	that	I	am	engaged.	She	wasn’t	very	surprised,	and	took
it	 with	 remarkable	 calm.	 She	 had	 no	 objections,	 asked	 but	 one
request,	and	said	my	 father	was	undoubtedly	 in	agreement	with	her
about	the	former	as	well	as	the	latter.	Her	request	was	that	I	should
permit	her	to	make	inquiries	about	your	family:	until	the	information
arrived	I	would	still	be	free	to	act	according	to	my	will;	they	neither
would	nor	could	prevent	me,	but	in	any	case	I	should	delay	my	letter
to	 your	 parents	 until	 then.	 To	which	 I	 replied	 that	we	were	 in	 fact
already	engaged,	and	that	in	any	case	my	letter	to	your	parents	would
not	be	a	further	step.	My	mother	insisted.	I	don’t	know	exactly	why,
perhaps	from	my	permanent	feeling	of	guilt	toward	my	parents,	but	I
gave	 in	 and	 handed	 my	 mother	 your	 father’s	 name	 in	 writing.	 It
seemed	 slightly	 ridiculous	 to	 think	 that	 should	 your	 parents	 have
similar	 ideas,	 they	 would	 collect	 nothing	 but	 favorable	 information
about	us,	and	that	no	information	agency	would	be	capable	of	telling
the	 truth	 about	 me.	 By	 the	 way,	 does	 your	 father	 know	 the
“Judgment”?	If	not,	please	give	it	to	him	to	read.
I	 cannot	 get	 over	 your	 courage!	 Am	 I	 not	 a	 stranger,	 don’t	 my

letters	 make	 me	 even	 more	 of	 a	 stranger?	 Don’t	 my	 relatives	 look
strange	 to	you?	These	are	my	parents	on	 the	picture	postcard;	don’t
they	 look	 incredibly	 like	 all	 other	 strangers,	 except	 that	 the
strangeness	may	be	diminished	by	the	fact	that	we	are	all	Jews?	And
so	 you	 are	 not	 afraid	 (I	 don’t	 think	 I	 shall	 ever	 get	 over	 my
amazement)	of	 this	man	who,	by	being	afraid	of	everything	himself,
becomes	 even	more	 terrible?	Aren’t	 you	 afraid	 of	 anything?	Do	you
give	yourself	without	hesitation?	 It’s	a	miracle,	 there	 is	nothing	 that
can	humanly	be	said	about	it,	one	simply	has	to	thank	God	for	it.

Franz

By	 the	 way,	 Felice,	 we	 have	 just	 managed	 to	 avoid	 our	 first
quarrel.	 You	 invited	 someone	 to	 the	 place	 where	 no	 one	 is
allowed	to	be?	(This	is	meant	to	be	more	serious	than	it	sounds.)
But	actually	Frl.	Brühl	is	an	exception,	she	can	be	invited,	but	she
is	the	only	one.	I	like	her,	pat	her	cheek	gently	for	me.

July	[5]	6,	1913
Oh	 dear,	 I	 shall	 certainly	 have	 to	 hurry	 if	 this	 letter	 is	 to	 arrive



tomorrow.	It	is	now	Saturday,	a	quarter	past	six.
There	 was	 no	 letter	 today,	 hence	 no	 answer	 to	 my	 letter	 of
yesterday.	Didn’t	 you	 take	 it	 the	way	 it	was	meant?	Do	you	 think	 I
was	 wrong	 to	 give	 my	 mother	 permission?	Was	 it	 wrong	 of	 me	 to
write	and	tell	you?	I	gave	in	to	my	mother	not	only	from	a	sense	of
guilt,	as	I	said	before,	but	owing	to	my	general,	and	where	my	mother
is	 concerned,	 especially	 pronounced,	 dialectic	 incompetence,	 and,
above	all,	owing	to	general	weakness.	The	fact	that	I	saw	how	deeply
she	 worries	 about	 me	 was	 yet	 another	 reason,	 if	 by	 no	 means	 the
decisive	one.	But	 it	 seemed	perfectly	natural	 that	 I	 should	write	and
tell	you	about	it	once	it	was	done,	for	surely	we	want—and	in	our	life
together	there	will	always	be	plenty	of	opportunity—to	be	frank	with
each	other	 to	 the	utmost	 limit,	 to	 the	 full	extent	of	our	relationship.
Would	 you	wish	me	 to	 start	 off	 by	 withholding	 this	 trivial	matter?
And	 in	 that	 sense	 it	 is	a	 trivial	matter.	 It	 is	not	 I	who	 inquire	about
your	family,	to	me	your	family	is	and	always	will	be—which	I	dread
for	 your	 sake,	 and	 have	 said	 so	 before—more	 remote	 than	 you	will
probably	 wish	 them	 to	 be.	 So	 how	 could	 I	 possibly	 be	 deeply
concerned	 about	 your	 family	 now?	 And	 if	 we	 wish	 to	 make	 a	 life
together	we	can	be	concerned	with	only	the	deepest	feelings.	Each	of
us	 will	 have	 to	 find	 within	 himself	 his	 own	 direction	 and	 his	 own
decision.	My	 parents,	 as	well	 as	 yours,	 are	 forced	 to	 fall	 back	 upon
outward	appearances,	 for	basically	 they	are	outside	 the	matters	 that
concern	 us.	 They	 know	 nothing	 except	 what	 they	 hear	 through	 the
agency;	we	know	more,	or	 imagine	we	know	more,	and	 in	any	case
what	we	know	is	different	and	more	important—so	the	agency	doesn’t
concern	us	in	any	way,	it	is	the	concern	of	our	parents,	something	one
can	 allow	 them	 to	 amuse	 themselves	with,	 something	 to	 keep	 them
occupied.	We	are	not	affected	by	 it,	at	 least	 so	 I	 thought,	but	 then	 I
didn’t	get	an	answer.
Yesterday	 evening	 I	 wandered	 around	 the	 district	 where,	 if	 my
dreams	come	true,	you	and	I	ought	to	live	together.	They	have	started
to	build,	but	there	are	still	some	gypsies	on	part	of	the	land.	I	walked
around	 for	 a	 long	 time	 examining	 everything.	 Eventually	 it	 will	 be
lovely	 there;	 it’s	 fairly	 high,	 a	 long	way	out	 of	 town,	 and	 yesterday
after	 the	 rain	 the	 air	 was	 unusually	 clean.	What’s	more,	 I	 felt	 very
well	 there	 yesterday,	 not	 in	 the	 least	 as	 I	 do	 now.	 This	 is	 how	my
moods	play	with	me	incessantly.

Franz



July	6,	1913
You	are	cross	with	me,	Felice?	Listen,	I	do	feel	guilty,	but	not	because
I	did	it,	nor	because	I	told	you	about	it,	but	because	I	may	have	hurt
you.	I	could	easily	make	excuses	for	everything,	have	in	fact	already
done	so	to	some	extent;	besides,	I	have	above	all	this	sleepless	brain	of
mine	as	my	best	excuse	(I	don’t	know	what	this	sleeplessness	will	lead
to	in	the	end,	but	a	permanent	unendurable	state	of	this	kind	is	bound
to	 point	 at	 something);	 but	 please,	 Felice,	 don’t	 listen	 to	 excuses,
simply	accept	it	and	forgive	without	excuses,	just	as	I	regret	it	without
guilt.
Well,	 I	had	no	 letter	 today,	and	 last	night	 I	was	almost	physically
near	you	in	my	misery.	We—Max,	his	wife,	his	brother-in-law,	Felix,
and	I—went	to	a	cabaret	to	which	my	wife	would	not	be	allowed	to
go.	Generally	speaking,	I	appreciate	this	kind	of	thing,	I	believe	I	have
a	deep,	an	immensely	deep	understanding	for	it	and	enjoy	it	with	my
pulse	racing,	but	yesterday,	except	for	the	dancing	and	singing	of	one
Negro	girl,	it	meant	nothing	to	me.
To	get	back	to	it.	Please	think	again,	Felice!	We	really	mustn’t	allow
ourselves	to	be	at	loggerheads	just	now,	when	we	are	about	to	come
together.

Franz

June	[July]	7,	1913
You	see,	Felice,	you	have	already	begun	to	suffer	at	my	hands;	it	has
started	and	God	knows	where	it	will	end.	And	your	grief,	I	can	see	it
quite	clearly,	 is	more	specific,	more	unpleasant,	more	extensive	than
any	 suffering	 I	 have	 so	 far	 inflicted	 upon	 you.	 The	 question	 of
whether	 I	 am	 to	 blame	need	not	 be	 considered	 at	 all,	 and	 even	 the
occasion	 might	 almost	 be	 ignored.	 What	 matters	 is	 that	 you	 have
suffered	 a	 great	 injustice,	 and	 this	 alone	 has	 to	 be	 considered—i.e.,
my	attitude	toward	it	and	what	the	whole	thing	signifies.
It	is	entirely	immaterial	whether	my	mother	is	right	or	wrong.	She
is	 right,	 unquestionably,	 and	more	 so	 than	 you	 imagine.	 She	 knows
practically	nothing	about	you,	other	than	what	was	in	the	letter	you
once	wrote	to	her.	Apart	from	this	she	has	merely	heard	from	me	that
I	wish	 to	marry	you.	That	 is	all	 she	knows,	since	not	a	word	can	be
got	out	of	me.	I	am	unable	to	talk	to	anyone,	least	of	all	my	parents.	It
seems	 as	 though	 the	 very	 sight	 of	 those	 I	 sprang	 from	 fills	me	with



dismay.	Yesterday	by	chance	all	of	us—my	parents,	my	sister,	and	I—
were	 obliged	 to	walk	 for	 about	 an	hour	 in	 the	dark	 along	 a	muddy
road.	Needless	to	say,	in	spite	of	all	her	efforts,	my	mother	walked	in
so	 clumsy	 a	 fashion	 that	 she	 got	 her	 shoes,	 and	 undoubtedly	 her
stockings	 and	 skirts	 as	 well,	 covered	 in	 dirt.	 Yet	 she	 was	 firmly
convinced	she	might	have	been	in	a	far	worse	mess,	and	on	reaching
home	 asked	 me	 (in	 fun,	 of	 course)	 to	 acknowledge	 this	 fact	 by
inspecting	her	shoes—to	testify	that	they	were	really	not	so	very	dirty.
But	 believe	 me,	 I	 was	 quite	 incapable	 of	 looking	 down	 at	 them,
because	 I	was	 repelled,	and	not,	as	you	might	 think,	by	 the	dirt.	By
then,	however,	as	during	 the	whole	of	 the	previous	afternoon,	 I	had
come	to	feel	some	little	affection,	or	rather	admiration,	for	my	father
for	being	able	 to	put	up	with	all	 this—with	my	mother	and	me,	my
sisters	with	 their	 families	 in	 the	 country,	 and	 the	 confusion	 in	 their
summer	 home	 where	 cotton	 wool	 is	 to	 be	 found	 lying	 among	 the
plates	and	a	disgusting	assortment	of	all	kinds	of	objects	on	the	beds;
where	 one	 of	my	 sisters,	 the	middle	 one,	 is	 lying	 in	 bed	with	 some
slight	throat	infection,	while	her	husband	sits	beside	her	and	in	fun	as
well	 as	 in	 earnest	 keeps	 calling	 her	 “My	 Precious”	 and	 “My	 All”;
where	the	little	boy,	because	he	can’t	help	himself	while	being	played
with,	does	his	business	on	the	floor	in	the	middle	of	the	room,	where
the	two	maids	jostle	each	other	in	the	performance	of	various	duties,
where	 my	 mother	 insists	 on	 waiting	 on	 everyone,	 where	 bread	 is
spread	with	goose-drippings	which,	 if	one’s	 lucky,	 trickle	only	down
one’s	fingers.	I	do	supply	information,	don’t	I?	Yet	I	am	really	getting
it	 all	 wrong	when	 I	 seek	 an	 explanation	 for	my	 inability	 to	 put	 up
with	 all	 this	 in	 the	 circumstances	 rather	 than	 within	 myself.
Everything	is	a	thousand	times	less	unbearable	than	I	have	described
here	 or	 before,	 but	 my	 repugnance	 when	 faced	 with	 it	 all	 is	 a
thousand	 times	 greater	 than	 I	 could	 ever	 describe.	 It	 is	 not	 because
they	 are	 relatives	 that	 I	 cannot	 bear	 to	 be	 in	 the	 same	 room	 with
them,	but	merely	because	they	are	people;	and	I	am	going	out	there
on	Sunday	afternoon,	though	fortunately	I	am	under	no	obligation,	for
the	sole	purpose	of	proving	it	once	again.	Yesterday	I	was	so	choked
with	loathing	that	I	groped	for	the	door	almost	as	if	it	were	dark,	and
I	was	far	from	the	house	and	out	on	the	road	before	I	felt	better;	but	I
had	stored	up	so	much	of	 it	 that	 I	still	haven’t	rid	myself	of	 it,	even
today.	I	cannot	live	with	people;	I	absolutely	hate	all	my	relatives,	not
because	 they	 are	 my	 relatives,	 not	 because	 they	 are	 wicked,	 not
because	I	don’t	think	well	of	them	(which	by	no	means	diminishes	my



“terrible	 timidity,”	 as	 you	 suggest),	 but	 simply	because	 they	 are	 the
people	with	whom	 I	 live	 in	 close	 proximity.	 It	 is	 just	 that	 I	 cannot
abide	communal	life;	what’s	more,	I	hardly	have	the	energy	to	regard
it	as	a	misfortune.	Seen	in	a	detached	way,	I	enjoy	all	people,	but	my
enjoyment	 is	 not	 so	 great	 that,	 given	 the	 necessary	 physical
requirements,	I	would	not	be	incomparably	happier	living	in	a	desert,
in	 a	 forest,	 on	 an	 island,	 rather	 than	 here	 in	my	 room	between	my
parents’	bedroom	and	living	room.
It	 certainly	 was	 not	 my	 intention	 to	 make	 you	 suffer,	 yet	 I	 have

done	so;	obviously	 it	never	will	be	my	intention	to	make	you	suffer,
yet	 I	 shall	 always	 do	 so.	 (The	 business	 about	 the	 inquiries	 is	 of	 no
importance	at	the	moment;	my	mother	did	nothing	about	it	on	Friday
because	she	wanted	to	discuss	 it	with	my	father;	 there	was	no	 letter
from	you	on	Saturday,	and	with	my	sense	of	guilt	toward	you,	I	asked
my	mother	 to	wait,	 since	on	Sunday	 there	was	again	no	 letter	 from
you;	 that	 afternoon	 I	 withdrew	 the	 permission	 I	 had	 given	 my
mother.)	 Felice,	 beware	 of	 thinking	 of	 life	 as	 commonplace,	 if	 by
commonplace	 you	 mean	 monotonous,	 simple,	 petty.	 Life	 is	 merely
terrible;	 I	 feel	 it	 as	 few	 others	 do.	 Often—and	 in	 my	 inmost	 self
perhaps	 all	 the	 time—I	 doubt	 whether	 I	 am	 a	 human	 being.	 The
wrong	I	have	done	you	is	only	the	fortuitous	occasion	for	my	realizing
it.	I	really	don’t	know	what	to	do.

Franz

July	8,	1913
Today	Felice,	when	reading	your	letter	which	is	so	sweet	that	it	quite
bewilders	me,	when	trying	to	trace	your	kindness	back	to	its	source,	I
am	 left	 agreeing	 yet	 again,	 even	 more	 forcibly	 with	 what	 I	 wrote
yesterday.
No	 one	 can	 say	 we	 have	 joined	 hands	 thoughtlessly;	 what

influenced	 us	 was	 not	 proximity,	 which	 can	 be	 misleading,	 not	 a
moment	 which	 can	 be	 misleading,	 not	 a	 word	 which	 can	 be
misleading—and	yet.	By	now,	Felice,	can’t	you	see	(look	at	 it	 in	 the
light	of	this	last	episode)	what	you	have	actually	done,	and	what	you
are	still	at	liberty	to	undo.	It	is	not	possible,	and	though	I	may	reach
out	 for	 it	desperately,	 yet	 it	 is	not	 for	me.	 It	 is	not	 irresolution	 that
confounds	me	at	every	turn,	rather	a	firm	conviction	which	has	never
left	me,	but	which	I	have	disregarded	because	of	and	despite	my	love



for	you;	ultimately,	however,	 this	conviction	will	not	be	disregarded
because	it	springs	directly	from	my	nature.
Haven’t	I	for	months	now	been	squirming	before	you	like	something
poisonous?	Am	I	not	here	one	moment,	 there	 the	next?	Are	you	not
beginning	to	feel	sick	at	the	sight	of	me?	Can	you	not	see	by	now	that
if	 disaster—yours,	 your	 disaster,	 Felice—is	 to	 be	 averted,	 I	 have	 to
remain	 locked	 up	 within	 myself?	 I	 am	 not	 a	 human	 being;	 I	 am
capable	 of	 tormenting	 you	 cold-bloodedly,	 you	 whom	 I	 love	 most,
whom	 I	 love	 alone	 out	 of	 the	 entire	 human	 race	 (as	 far	 as	 I’m
concerned,	 I	 have	 no	 relatives	 and	 no	 friends,	 am	 unable	 to	 have
them,	 and	 don’t	 want	 them),	 and	 cold-bloodedly	 allowing	 you	 to
forgive	the	torments	I	inflict.	Can	I	tolerate	this	situation	when	I	am	in
a	position	 to	 see	 it	 so	 clearly,	 have	 suspected	 it,	 find	my	 suspicions
confirmed,	and	continue	to	suspect	it?	If	need	be,	I	can	live	as	I	am,
my	rage	turned	inward,	tormenting	only	by	letter,	but	as	soon	as	we
lived	 together	 I	would	 become	 a	 dangerous	 lunatic	 fit	 to	 be	 burned
alive.	The	havoc	I	would	create!	Would	have	to	create!	And	if	I	didn’t
create	 it	 I	would	be	more	 lost	 than	ever,	 for	 it	would	be	against	my
nature,	and	whoever	happened	to	be	with	me	would	be	lost.	You	have
no	idea,	Felice,	what	havoc	literature	creates	inside	certain	heads.	It	is
like	monkeys	 leaping	about	 in	 the	 treetops,	 instead	of	staying	 firmly
on	the	ground.	It	is	being	lost	and	not	being	able	to	help	it.	What	can
one	do?
Reading	about	the	way	you	all	talk	of	your	brother’s	wedding,	the
way	 his	 parents-in-law	 worship	 him	 and	 his	 parents	 love	 their
daughter-in-law,	do	you	imagine	I	feel	any	human	sympathy?	I	do	feel
apprehensive,	however,	when	I	read	what	you	say	about	my	father,	as
though	 you	 were	 changing	 your	 allegiance,	 ready	 to	 side	 with	 him
against	me.

Franz

July	9,	1913
Dearest	Felice,	if	you	are	unable	to	write	to	me,	don’t	write	to	me,	but
let	me	write	 to	you	and	 repeat	day	by	day	what	you	already	know:
that	I	love	you	as	much	as	I	have	any	power	to	love,	and	that	I	wish	to
serve	you	and	must	serve	you,	as	long	as	I	live.

Franz



[July]	10,	1913
If	only	I	were	with	you,	Felice,	and	had	the	capacity	to	make	things
clear	 to	you,	or	 rather	 the	capacity	 just	 to	 see	 things	clearly.	 It’s	all
my	fault.	After	all,	we	have	never	been	as	united	as	we	are	now;	this
Yes	on	both	sides	has	tremendous	power.	But	I	am	held	back	by	what
is	 almost	 a	 command	 from	heaven;	 an	 apprehension	 that	 cannot	 be
appeased;	everything	that	used	to	be	of	the	greatest	importance	to	me
—my	health,	my	small	 income,	my	miserable	disposition,	all	 this	 for
which	 there	 would	 be	 some	 justification—vanishes,	 is	 as	 nothing
compared	 to	 this	 apprehension,	 and	 seems	 to	 be	 used	 only	 as	 a
pretext.	To	be	quite	 frank	(as	 I	have	always	been	with	you	as	 far	as
my	 self-knowledge	 at	 the	 moment	 allows)	 and	 at	 long	 last	 to	 be
recognized	 by	 you	 as	 the	madman	 I	 am,	 it	 is	my	dread	 of	 the	 union
even	with	the	most	beloved	woman,	above	all	with	her.108	How	can	I
explain	to	you	what	to	me	is	so	clear	that	I	long	to	cover	it,	to	stop	it
blinding	me!	And	 then	of	 course	 it	 becomes	 less	 clear	 again	when	 I
read	 your	 sweet,	 trusting	 letter;	 then	 everything	 appears	 to	 be
perfectly	all	right,	and	happiness	seems	to	await	us	both.
Can	you	understand	 this,	Felice,	 if	only	 from	a	distance?	 I	have	a
definite	 feeling	 that	 through	marriage,	 through	 the	 union,	 through	 the
dissolution	of	this	nothingness	that	I	am,	I	shall	perish,	and	not	alone
but	with	my	wife,	and	that	the	more	I	love	her	the	swifter	and	more
terrible	it	will	be.	Now	you	tell	me	what	we	should	do,	for	I	believe
we	 are	 now	 so	 close	 to	 each	 other	 that	 neither	 of	 us,	 without	 the
other’s	corroboration,	could	do	anything	on	his	own.	Think	carefully,
too,	 about	all	 that	has	been	 left	unsaid!	Ask	questions,	 I	 shall	 answer
every	one.	God,	it	really	is	about	time	to	ease	the	pressure,	and	there
surely	isn’t	a	girl	who	has	been	loved	as	I	love	you,	and	been	tortured
as	I	find	it	necessary	to	torture	you.

Franz

July	13,	1913
It’s	lovely	on	our	balcony	in	the	evening.	I	have	just	been	sitting	there
for	a	little	while.	I	am	preposterously	tired;	this	morning	when	I	was
supposed	 to	 get	 up—the	 night	merely	 having	 tired	me	 the	more—I
heartily	 cursed	 everything	 around	me,	 myself	 in	 particular.	 If	 I	 am
unable	 to	 sleep	 properly,	 how	 shall	 I	 ever	 again	 be	 able	 to	 write
properly?	 And	 if	 I	 cannot	 do	 that,	 then	 everything	 is	 but	 a	 dream,



though	a	dream	already	fathomed.
Needless	to	say	my	latest	plan	is	by	no	means	the	best	plan.	After
all,	 the	 best	 plan	would	 probably	 be	 in	 some	 clever	way	 to	 raise	 a
certain	amount	of	money,	and	to	go	south	with	you	forever	to	some
island	or	lake.	In	the	south	I	feel	everything	is	possible.	And	there	lead
a	life	of	seclusion,	feeding	on	grass	and	fruit.	But	I	don’t	need	to	look
into	 myself	 very	 deeply	 to	 see	 that	 I	 don’t	 even	 want	 to	 go	 south.
Simply	to	race	through	the	nights	with	my	pen,	that’s	what	I	want.	And	to
perish	 by	 it,	 or	 lose	 my	 reason,	 that’s	 what	 I	 want	 too,	 since	 it	 is	 the
inevitable	and	long-anticipated	consequence.
But	my	latest	plan	is	as	follows:	The	apartment	I	had	chosen	for	us
cannot	be	occupied	before	May	of	next	year,	provided	I	get	it;	it	is	in	a
house	 belonging	 to	 a	 cooperative	 building	 society	 of	 which	 I	 have
become	a	member.	So	we	won’t	be	losing	any	time,	Felice,	 if	 I	don’t
write	 to	 your	 parents	 just	 yet.	 So	 let	 us	 remain	 as	 we	 are	 until
February,	 January,	 or	 Christmas.	 You	 will	 get	 to	 know	 me	 better;
there	 are	 still	 a	 number	 of	 horrible	 recesses	 in	 me	 that	 you	 don’t
know.	You	will	take	your	summer	trip	and	in	this	way	as	well	as	by
means	of	letters	from	my	trip,	you	will	be	able	to	view	our	situation
more	clearly.	But	above	all	 this	autumn	 I	 shall	yield	at	 last	 to	 these
temptations	 to	write,	 provided	my	 state	 of	 health	permits,	 and	 then
see	for	myself	what	 there	 is	 inside	me.	After	all,	 I	have	still	done	so
little;	 I	 am	 nothing;	 perhaps	 I	 shall	 succeed	 with	 something	 this
autumn;	I	have	no	intention	of	sparing	myself.	Then	you	will	see	more
clearly	with	whom	you	wish	to	cast	your	lot,	and	what	it	is	that	has	to
be	 considered.	 Needless	 to	 say,	 I	 shall	 be	 yours	 then	 as	 I	 am	 now.
What	do	you	say	to	this	plan?

Franz

[PICTURE	POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Prague,	July	14,	1913]

On	 the	 terrace	 outside	 the	 summer	house.109	 Lovely	 distant	 view	 of
the	 countryside.	Not	 so	 lovely	 looking	back	 into	 the	 room.	Nor	 into
myself,	 there	 the	 screw	 keeps	 turning.—On	Tuesday	 there	will	 be	 a
letter	with	yet	another	plan.110

Best	wishes.	F
July	17,	1913

I	could	write	this	when	I	get	home,	but	my	impatience	won’t	permit



it.	You	don’t	write	to	me.	Do	you	despise	me?	Really,	you	shouldn’t.
You	 see,	 I	 grudge	 myself	 the	 person	 dearest	 to	 me;	 in	 the	 general
listlessness	 of	 my	 existence	 I	 hesitate	 to	 seize	 her;	 or	 at	 least	 I	 set
myself	a	time	limit.	Dearest,	don’t	despise	me	for	it,	there	is	a	lot	that
is	despicable	about	me,	but	not	that.

Franz

July	19,	1913
I	haven’t	had	a	letter	from	you	since	Sunday.	It	is	impossible	for	me	to
know	what	has	happened.	My	letter	must	have	offended	you,	there	is
no	 other	 explanation.	 But	 if	 it	 did	 offend	 you,	 you	 must	 have
misunderstood	 it,	 though	 that	 again	 is	 hard	 to	 believe,	 for	 after	 all
you	 have	 known	 me	 for	 a	 whole	 year	 and	 must	 realize	 that	 I	 am
incapable	 consciously	 of	 putting	 down	 a	 single	 word	 at	 which	 you
would	have	reason	to	take	offense.	You	yourself	said	that	we	mustn’t
hold	things	against	each	other,	and	now	you	want	to	start	it?	Felice,
send	 me	 one	 word,	 please,	 nice	 or	 nasty;	 don’t	 make	 my	 misery
greater	than	it	is,	silence	is	surely	the	greatest	punishment	imaginable.

Franz

July	27,	1913
Another	Sunday	without	you!	It	really	is	a	hideous	life.	And	it	upsets
me	 that	 the	 reason	 for	 your	 not	 writing	 can	 only	 be	 that	 you
misunderstood	 my	 express	 letter.	 The	 letter	 you	 receive	 today	 will
have	made	that	clear.	But	should	a	misunderstanding	between	us	be
possible?	 Am	 I	 not	 yours,	 are	 you	 not	 mine?	 The	 fact	 that	 I	 am
involved	up	to	my	neck	with	my	family,	 is	 this	an	argument	against
it?	The	zest	with	which	 I	 shall	detach	myself	will	be	all	 the	greater.
Besides,	who	knows	what	would	have	become	of	me	if,	bloodless	as	I
am,	I	hadn’t	been	lying	in	this	family	warmth	for	30	years?
But	none	of	 this	presents	any	serious	obstacle;	we	belong	together
and	shall	be	together;	we	must	merely	find	a	way	to	make	it	clear	to
my	 father	 that	 not	 one	 penny	 of	 his	 money	 is	 to	 contribute	 to	 our
household	once	we	are	married.	The	very	thought	of	 it	 fills	me	with
well-being.
Even	 then	 I	 won’t	 know	what	 your	 parents	 are	 going	 to	 say,	 nor
how	one	can	get	them	to	talk.



But	now,	dearest	Felice,	please	write	every	day	 if	possible,	and	 to
the	office,	otherwise	it	takes	too	long	to	reach	me.	But	you	know	this,
and	yet	 time	and	again	(time	and	again!	 in	 the	past	 fortnight	 it	was
once,	all	told)	you	write	to	the	apartment.
Well,	courage	and	confidence	and	no	misunderstandings!

Franz

July	28,	1913
No	letter	again.	How	can	you	torment	me	so,	Felice?	Torment	me	so
unnecessarily!	When	even	a	few	words	would	do	me	good	and	help	to
get	rid	of	these	headaches	that	grip	my	head	like	a	hood.	If	only	you
were	 to	write	 that	 you	 hadn’t	 yet	made	 up	 your	mind,	 or	 that	 you
were	unable	or	unwilling	 to	write.	 I	would	be	quite	 satisfied	with	3
words,	but	nothing!	Nothing!

July	30,	1913
I	ought	to	have	had	a	letter	from	you	yesterday,	Felice,	even	the	day
before	yesterday.	And	if	no	letter,	then	at	least	a	telegram,	in	response
to	 yesterday’s	 letter.	You	oughtn’t	 to	have	kept	me	 in	 this	 state.	Do
you	realize	what	I	might	do	if	I	 found	myself	abandoned	by	you—at
least	by	letter—for	no	reason?	Though	I	have	inflicted	worse	torments
on	you	in	the	course	of	this	wonderful	and	terrible	year,	I	have	always
done	 so	 out	 of	 some	 inner	 need,	 never	 an	 outer	 one,	 like	 you	 from
Frankfurt	and	again	now.	These	visitors	and	relatives!	I	won’t	be	able
to	distinguish	one	from	the	other	and	fear	they	will	all	be	my	enemies
in	 mutual	 enmity.	 How	 am	 I	 to	 regard	 them	 if	 some	 small	 sign	 of
surprise	or	a	 little	discomfiture	shown	by	the	assembled	company	at
your	writing	5	lines	to	me	instead	of	being	with	them	seems	to	worry
you	more	than	my	despair	during	these	nights	and	days	which,	with
their	 headaches	 and	 agitated	 wakefulness,	 are	 almost
indistinguishable	to	me?	Shall	I	mean	more	to	you,	Felice,	once	I	am
publicly	 your	 fiancé?	 But	 just	 as	 then	 no	 one	 will	 have	 the	 right,
simply	 because	 you	 have	 company,	 to	 prevent	 you	 from	writing	 to
me,	if	writing	is	as	important	as	it	was	on	Sunday,	so	no	one	has	the
right	 to	 do	 so	 now,	 and	 if	 anyone	 does	 have	 it,	 you	 are	 not	 to
acknowledge	it.	Your	failure	to	write	or	send	a	telegram	has	made	me
unhappy,	unhappier	 than	 you	 can	 imagine.	 This	 is	 neither	 resentment
nor	misunderstanding,	Felice,	nor	does	it	affect	my	love	for	you,	that
is	unassailable.	It	is	merely	well-founded	sadness.



Franz

I	 have	 re-read	 this	 letter.	 My	 dearest	 Felice,	 should	 you	 feel
within	yourself	even	the	slightest	possibility	of	 taking	offense	at
this	letter,	then	remember	that	as	a	result	of	the	total	absence	of
news,	you	haven’t	 the	 remotest	 idea	how	I	have	been	 feeling	 in
the	recent	and	most	recent	past.	It’s	indescribable.

August	1,	1913
What	a	 strange	man	 I	have	been	going	around	with	 just	now!	He	 is
either	a	great	fool	or	a	minor	prophet.	But	he’s	not	going	to	interfere
here!——
My	dearest	Felice,	was	today’s	 letter	received	with	understanding?

Do	 you	 realize,	 by	 the	 way,	 that	 you	 will	 have	 a	 white-haired
husband?	It’s	awful	the	way	I	am	going	downhill!	The	palpitations,	for
example,	that	go	with	this	letter!
Dearest,	 once	 again	 your	 travels	will	 take	 you	 further	 away	 from

me,	and	you	are	not	in	the	least	sorry.	On	the	contrary,	the	house	you
are	 going	 to	 is	 called	 Sanssouci.	 Tell	 your	 sister	 she	 is	 no	 friend	 of
mine	 if	 she	 prevents	 you	 from	 writing.	 My	 parents	 are	 gradually
getting	used	 to	 their	 new	worry	 and	are	beginning	 to	 incorporate	 it
with	the	others.	Why	do	you	think	it	is	better	for	me	to	write	to	your
father	while	you	are	away?	I	should	have	thought	it	would	actually	be
better	 if	 you	were	 there	when	my	 first	 letter,	 not	 addressed	 to	 you,
arrived	at	your	home.
What	 should	 I	 consult	 Max	 about?	 No	 one	 else	 can	 take	 the

responsibility,	 nor	 offer	 us	 advice,	 for	 what	 concerns	 us	 alone,	 and
they	are	matters	of	grave	responsibility.	But	if	I	were	to	follow	Max’s
example	in	financial	management,	that	would	be	bad	indeed.	Max	has
more	money	and	a	larger	income	than	I;	he	is	not	at	all	miserly,	not	at
all	extravagant—and	yet	in	his	house	there	is	more	talk	about	money
and	 the	 lack	 of	 it	 than	 there	 should	 be.	 And	 this	 very	 talk	 about
money,	for	which	no	doubt	his	wife,	though	perhaps	in	all	innocence,
is	to	blame,	enhances	its	importance	which,	even	if	one	smarted	under
lack	of	money,	one	could	so	easily	deny.	I	remember	leaning	against
the	mirror	when	his	wife	in	front	of	 it	wrapped	a	lace	shawl	around
her	shoulders	(her	clothes,	though	again	in	all	innocence,	are	a	little
conspicuous	and	somewhat	incongruous),	and	for	something	to	say,	I
exclaimed:	“That	does	 look	sumptuous!”	With	a	disparaging	gesture,



she	replied:	“But	 it’s	as	cheap	as	could	be!”	This	 is	 sad,	 foolish,	and
degrading.	And	not	the	way	I	want	to	be.

Franz

July	[presumably	August]	1,	1913
So	 in	 spite	 of	 everything	 you	 want	 to	 take	 up	 the	 cross,	 Felice?
Attempt	 the	 impossible?	 You	 misunderstood	 me:	 I	 did	 not	 say	 that
writing	 ought	 to	 make	 everything	 clearer,	 but	 instead	 makes
everything	 worse;	 what	 I	 said	 was	 that	 writing	 makes	 everything
clearer	 and	 worse.	 This	 is	 what	 I	 meant.	 But	 this	 is	 not	 what	 you
mean,	and	yet	you	wish	to	be	mine.
I	 have	 not	 come	 to	 the	 end	 of	my	 counterarguments,	 their	 list	 is
endless;	 the	 impossibility	 is	 constantly	 proven.	 But	 you	 too	 reveal
yourself	 as	 constant	 (though	 not,	 of	 course,	 since	 you	 are	 a	 human
being,	 as	 constant	 as	 the	 impossibility).	 I	 cannot	 resist	 a	 feeling	 of
hope,	and	so	I	abandon	all	my	counterarguments—though	I	must	not
conceal	 the	 fact	 that	 this	 is	 done	 in	 the	 conscious	 knowledge	 of	 it
being	 a	 delusion.	 Thinking	 it	 over,	 your	 letter	 does	 not	 so	much	 as
touch	on	my	counterarguments;	 led	by	your	emotions	 (your	 feelings
of	 kindness,	 but	 also	 of	 distance,	 as	well	 as,	 in	 the	 best	 sense,	 your
limited	 experience)	 you	 simply	 turn	 my	 enormous	 obstacles	 into
“tiny”	 ones,	 specifically	 “tiny,”	 and	 are	 confident	 of	 just	 enough
courage	 to	overcome	 them.	But	did	 I	 really	expect	a	 refutation?	No.
There	 were	 only	 three	 possible	 answers:	 “It	 is	 impossible,	 and	 so	 I
don’t	want	 to,”	 or	 “It	 is	 impossible,	 so	 I	 don’t	want	 to	 for	 the	 time
being,”	or	 “It	 is	 impossible,	 but	 I	want	 to	nevertheless.”	 I	 take	your
letter	 to	 be	 an	 answer	 in	 the	 third	 sense	 (that	 it	 does	 not	 correspond
exactly	 is	worrying	me	 enough),	 and	 I	 take	you	 for	my	beloved	bride.
And	 promptly	 (it	 refuses	 to	 be	 kept	 back)	 but	 perhaps	 for	 the	 last
time,	 I	 say	 that	 I	 am	 absurdly	 afraid	 of	 our	 future	 and	 of	 the
unhappiness	 which,	 through	 my	 fault	 and	 temperament,	 could
develop	 from	our	 life	 together,	and	which	would	be	bound	 to	affect
you	 first	and	 the	more	profoundly,	 for	 I	am	basically	a	cold,	 selfish,
callous	 creature,	 despite	 my	 weakness	 which	 conceals	 rather	 than
mitigates	these	qualities.
Now	what	shall	we	do	in	the	first	instance,	Felice?	All	right,	I	will
write	 to	 your	 parents.	 But	 before	 doing	 so,	 I	 shall	 have	 to	 tell	 my
parents.	 This	 announcement,	 even	 if	 it	 consists	 of	 only	 5	 sentences,



will	be	the	longest	conversation	I	shall	have	had	with	my	mother	for
months,	 and	 with	 my	 father	 for	 years.	 It	 will	 thereby	 acquire	 a
solemnity	 not	 altogether	 agreeable	 to	 me.	 I	 won’t	 tell	 them	 until	 I
have	had	a	reply	to	this	letter,	because	somehow	you	still	seem	to	me	not
wholly	committed.
What	 will	 your	 parents	 have	 to	 say	 to	 my	 letter?	 From	 her
photograph	I	had	imagined	your	mother	to	be	different,	but	this	had
nothing	to	do	with	the	fact	that	I	was	afraid	of	her;	it	is	just	that	fear,
next	to	indifference,	is	the	basic	feeling	I	have	toward	people.	In	fact,
I	was	afraid	of	your	entire	family	(with	the	possible	exception	of	your
sister	Erna);	 I	am	not	ashamed	to	admit	 this,	 for	 it	 is	as	 true	as	 it	 is
ridiculous.	Actually,	if	I	want	to	be	precise,	I	am	almost	afraid	of	my
own	parents,	certainly	of	my	father.	And	your	mother,	after	all,	was
somewhat	 peculiar,	 dressed	 all	 in	 black,	 mournful,	 disapproving,
reproachful,	 observant,	 stiff,	 a	 stranger	 within	 her	 family,	 let	 alone
toward	me.	Of	her	I	was	particularly	frightened	and	doubt	I	shall	ever
lose	my	fear.	On	the	other	hand,	I	fear	that	no	single	member	of	your
family	will	be	pleased	with	me,	 that	nothing	 I	do	will	 seem	right	 to
them,	that	even	what	I	write	in	my	first	letter	won’t	be	to	their	liking,
that	 as	 a	 bridegroom	 I	 shall	 never	 do	 what	 they	 imagine	 they	 can
rightly	 expect	 of	 a	 bridegroom,	 that	 my	 love	 for	 you,	 which	 may
never	even	be	noticed	by	any	stranger	or	relative	present,	is	not	love
in	 their	 sense,	 that	 this	 dissatisfaction	 (and	 dissatisfaction	 breeds
irritation,	 contempt,	 rage)	 will	 persist	 and	 may	 even	 infect	 you,
dissatisfaction	with	me	as	well	as	with	them.	Have	you	the	courage	to
face	this,	too?

Franz

August	2,	1913
My	dear,	dear	Felice!	There	is	no	letter	today,	which	is	not	surprising,
but	 where	 your	 letters	 are	 concerned	 I	 can	 no	 longer	 differentiate
between	 the	 normal	 and	 the	 surprising;	 I	 simply	 want	 them,	 must
have	them,	live	through	them.
I	have	an	idea	which,	if	you	like	it,	would	be	splendid.	I	could	write
to	your	father	as	soon	as	I	get	your	reply	to	my	last	letters.	Provided
your	 parents	 are	 not	 apprehensive—after	 all,	 there	 is	 no	 particular
reason	for	apprehension,	for	your	parents	do	not	know	me;	unless	you
were	to	give	me	away,	in	which	case	there	certainly	would	be—well,



provided	 your	 parents	 are	 not	 apprehensive,	 we	 could	 perhaps	 get
engaged	 in	 the	 presence	 of	 our	 parents	 in	 a	 fortnight’s	 time.	 If	 so,
would	it	not	be	possible—now	comes	my	idea—for	you	to	return	via
Prague?	Not	that	you	should	forfeit	any	part	of	your	vacation;	no,	not
that,	merely	that	on	your	return	journey	you	might	spend	a	few	hours
in	Prague.	Perhaps	on	the	last	Sunday,	or	the	last	Saturday;	if	it	were
Saturday	 then	 perhaps	 I	 could	 accompany	 you	 back	 to	 Berlin.	 Yes?
Would	that	be	a	good	thing?	Because	it	would	not	be	a	good	thing	if	I
were	 to	 consider	 only	 myself.	 For	 every	 word	 and	 every	 look	 you
exchange	 with	 my	 relatives	 is	 going	 to	 hurt	 me,	 not	 merely	 from
jealousy,	but	 above	all	 because	 I	have	 isolated	myself	 from	 them	so
completely,	and	am	happy	in	my	isolation,	whereas	now	through	you,
who	are	a	part	of	my	being,	renewed	contact	with	them	will	be,	if	not
established,	 at	 least	 intimated.	 And	 this,	 Felice,	 you	 must	 always
remember,	when	talking	to	them	as	well	as	to	others—if	you	wish	to
spare	me	unhappiness.	In	this	respect	I	really	have	myself	well	under
control.	 I	 can	 on	 occasions,	 for	 instance,	 blurt	 out	 everything	 about
myself,	 not	 deliberately,	 but	 it	 just	 happens—yet	 in	 the	 end
everything	 comes	pouring	neatly	 back	 into	me,	 and	 I	 am	a	 stranger
once	more,	although	I	may	have	disclosed	the	most	essential	part	of
me.	In	your	case,	I’m	afraid,	I	would	not	feel	the	same,	I	value	you	too
highly;	if	you	were	to	chatter	to	people,	I	would	lose	myself	in	them
through	 you.—But,	 sad	 as	 it	 is,	 you	will	 have	 to	meet	my	 relatives
some	time,	so	would	you	come?	The	joy	of	your	presence	would	really
make	anything	bearable	for	me.

Franz

What	sort	of	girl	is	that	Fräulein	Danziger	of	yours?
August	3,	1913

My	dearest	Felice,	you	can	see	how	much	I	need	your	 letters	by	 the
mere	 fact	 that	 each	 time	 there	 is	 no	news,	 in	 itself	 a	 disaster,	 some
further	disaster	befalls	me.	It	is	up	to	you	to	prevent	this.	I	really	was
sad	today.	Again	no	letter.	And	to	tell	the	truth,	for	weeks	past	I	have
been	delaying	my	morning	departure	for	the	country	so	as	to	be	able
to	pick	up	the	confidently	expected	Sunday	letter	as	soon	as	possible:
and	 for	 weeks	 past	 this	 precaution	 has	 brought	 me	 nothing	 but
sadness.	Today,	however,	 I	did	get	the	telegram.	But	 it	might	not	be
meant	for	me.	It	says	“Kafta”	instead	of	Kafka,	and	“pliol”	instead	of



Felice.	Still,	it	is	nice,	and	I	am	quite	content.
Please,	Felice,	 show	that	you	have	confidence	 in	me	by	promising
that	 a	 certain	 request,	which	 I	 shall	make	 only	 after	 receiving	 your
promise,	will	 be	 fulfilled	 by	 you	 precisely	 and	 unconditionally.	 It	 is
neither	bad	nor	 impossible,	 so	promise	me,	and	moreover	 in	solemn
words.
Why	do	you	think	it	would	be	of	advantage	to	us	both	if	my	father
were	to	pay	a	visit	to	Berlin	just	now?	This	is	what	you	wrote.	What
had	you	in	mind?
I	dream	about	you	almost	every	night,	such	is	my	need	to	be	near
you.	But,	 for	a	multitude	of	 reasons,	my	fear	 is	 just	as	great.	 I	don’t
think	 I	 shall	 come	 to	Berlin	at	all	while	we	are	engaged,	even	 if	we
were	not	to	get	married	until	May.	Would	this	be	all	right	for	you,	and
particularly	for	the	others?	Can	you	agree	to	it?

Franz

Have	you	taken	any	books	with	you?	If	so,	which?
August	4,	1913

Dearest	Felice,	I	withdraw	everything	I	may	have	said	yesterday.	The
apprehension	 that	 keeps	me	 from	you	 at	 present,	 that	 also	 prevents
me	from	wishing	you	were	coming	to	Prague,	is	justified;	but	there	is
still	greater	justification	for	my	immense	apprehension,	far	surpassing
the	other,	that	I	shall	perish	if	we	are	not	together	soon.	For	if	we	are
not	together	soon,	my	love	for	you,	which	refuses	any	other	thought
to	 enter	 my	 head,	 would	 be	 directed	 toward	 an	 imaginary	 idea,
toward	a	phantom,	toward	something	totally	unattainable	and	at	the
same	time	totally	and	at	all	times	indispensable;	but	if	this	were	so	it
might	be	enough	to	rip	me	out	of	this	world.	I	tremble	as	I	write.	So
come,	 Felice,	 come	 to	 Prague	 if	 you	 possibly	 can	 on	 your	 return
journey.
Having	made	 this	 request,	 I	 have	 to	 tell	 you	 the	 truth	 about	 yet
another,	 well-nigh	 the	 most	 important	 matter,	 especially	 since	 you
have	 not	 inquired	 about	 it	 for	 a	 long	 time	 and,	 virtually	 in	 silence,
have	allowed	 this	question	 to	be	excluded	 from	our	correspondence.
After	all,	I	always	used	to	say	that	it	was	my	physical	condition	that
prevented	 me	 from	 getting	 married,	 and	 this	 condition	 has	 by	 no
means	improved	since	then.	About	6	weeks	ago,	before	writing	one	of
the	decisive	letters,	I	went	to	see	the	doctor,	our	family	doctor.	I	don’t



find	 him	 very	 pleasant,	 though	 hardly	 less	 pleasant	 than	 doctors	 in
general.	 On	 the	whole	 I	 don’t	 believe	what	 he	 says,	 but	 I	 do	 allow
myself	to	be	reassured	by	him,	as	much	as	by	any	doctor.	In	this	sense
doctors	can	be	made	 to	serve	as	a	natural	 therapy.	At	 the	 time,	and
after	an	 intensive	examination,	 I	 received	 this	 reassurance	 from	him
(against	my	 inner	 conviction)	 in	 abundant	measure.	 I	 wrote	 to	 you
that	 very	 afternoon.	 Lately,	 however,	 I	 have	 had	 palpitations,
followed	by	stabs	and	pains	in	the	region	of	the	heart,	which	no	doubt
are	 caused	 largely,	 if	 not	 altogether,	 by	 the	 unbearable	 separation
from	you.	But	they	are	also	partly	due	to	the	fact	that	I	have	recently
been	swimming	too	much,	walking	too	far	and	too	fast,	which	I	have
been	doing	to	tire	myself,	and	thus	subdue	my	longing	for	you.	It	has
not	succeeded,	however,	and	instead	I	feel	these	pains	in	my	heart.	I
went	to	the	doctor	again	today.	As	he	says,	he	can	find	nothing	wrong
organically,	 although	 he	 is	 not	 quite	 sure	 of	 the	 heart-sound	 being
quite	 clear	 in	 a	 particular	 place.	 But	 he	 suggests	 that	 I	 take	 my
vacation	 now	 (impossible),	 take	 some	 medicine	 (also	 impossible),
sleep	well	(also	impossible),	not	go	south,	not	swim	(also	impossible),
and	lead	a	quiet	life	(least	possible	of	all).
This	you	had	to	be	told	before	I	write	the	letter	to	your	father.
But	how	 I	 look	 forward	 to	 these	 letters,	now	 that	 they	will	 arrive
regularly—starting,	if	not	tomorrow,	then	without	fail	on	Wednesday.

Yours,	Franz

[IN	 THE	 MARGIN]	 Have	 none	 of	 my	 letters	 gone	 astray?	 This	 is	 the	 4th
letter	to	Westerland?

5th	letter	to	Westerland
August	5,	1913

Dearest	Felice,	I	exaggerated	shamefully	yesterday	when	I	wrote	that	I
was	 not	 expecting	 a	 letter	 until	 Wednesday.	 On	 the	 contrary,	 I
expected	 it	 today	without	 fail,	 absolutely	without	 fail.	 And	 if	 not	 a
letter,	then	a	postcard	from	your	journey.	And	if	not	a	postcard,	then
a	 telegram.	 This	 begging	 makes	 me	 contemptible,	 but	 I	 lack	 self-
control	 in	 matters	 of	 far	 less	 importance,	 how	 much	 more	 when
awaiting	 your	 news.	 Then	 these	 thoughts	 keep	 crowding	 upon	 me:
You	don’t	 like	writing	to	me,	you’re	not	 thinking	about	me,	perhaps



you	 love	 me	 only	 on	 account	 of	 some	 distant	 memory.	 Miserable,
uncontrollable	begging!
As	a	matter	of	fact,	just	now	a	telegram	did	arrive.	Needless	to	say,
I	 took	 for	 granted	 it	 was	 from	 you,	 and	 the	 maid	 who	 brought	 it
received	a	radiant	smile.	Instead,	it	is	from	Madrid.	My	uncle	[Alfred
Löwy]	who	lives	there	is	my	closest	relative,	much	closer	to	me	than
my	parents,	but	only	 in	a	specific	sense,	of	course.	Although	 lately	 I
had	received	three	letters	from	him,	I	had	not	felt	like	writing	to	him.
Then	5	days	ago	(it	 takes	4	days	for	a	 letter	to	reach	Madrid,	which
isn’t	 long	 compared	 to	 communications	 between	 Prague	 and
Westerland)	 I	 sent	him	a	 copy	of	Arkadia	one	night	with	a	covering
letter	 in	 which	 I	 poured	 out	 all	 my	 troubles.	 And	 I	 added,	 after	 a
skillful	transition,	that	I	was	expecting	very	soon	to	become	officially
engaged	 (news	 which	 this	 uncle	 really	 should	 have	 received	 before
my	parents	were	told).	I	remembered	later	how	remarkably	close	this
letter	came	to	 the	“Judgment.”	There	 is	undoubtedly	a	great	deal	of
my	uncle	in	the	“Judgment”	(he	is	a	bachelor,	director	of	railways	in
Madrid,	knows	the	whole	of	Europe	with	the	exception	of	Russia),	and
here	 I	was	 announcing	my	engagement	 in	 a	 letter	 similar	 to	 that	 of
Georg	to	his	friend,	moreover	in	a	covering	letter	with	Arkadia.111—
Well,	my	uncle	must	have	misunderstood	my	 letter;	he	 imagines	we
are	 already	 officially	 engaged,	 for	 here	 is	 his	 telegram	 in	 full:
“Delighted	heartiest	congratulations	to	engaged	couple	Uncle	Alfred.”
Thus	we	are	being	elevated	to	official	status	from	Madrid,	while	your
parents	 are	 still	 living	 in	 ignorant	 bliss,	 knowing	 little	 or	 nothing
about	the	terrible	son-in-law	they	are	threatened	with.

Franz

August	6,	1913
At	last	the	sight	of	your	dear	handwriting	again.	The	postcards	from
Hamburg	 have	 not	 arrived;	 could	 you	 have	 addressed	 them
indistinctly	 and	 illegibly?	 Today’s	 postcard,	 for	 instance,	 reads
Niklasstr.	 No.	 6,	 and	 an	 error	 of	 this	 kind	 could	 cause	 me	 great
grief.112
We	need	not	mention	my	parents	again;	their	audible	warnings	are
over	and	done	with.	But	 I	 can	discover	no	definite	 advice	 from	you
with	 regard	 to	 my	 letter	 to	 your	 father,	 rather	 three	 contradictory
suggestions.	 However,	 I	 don’t	 want	 advice;	 instead	 I	 shall	 mail	 the



letter	 to	 your	 father	 (but	 to	 your	 father	 only;	 I	 have	 only	 just
mentioned	your	mother,	I	can’t	find	the	proper	form	of	addressing	my
letter	to	both	your	parents)	as	soon	as	I	have	your	reply	to	my	latest
heart	 trouble.	 Today,	 for	 instance,	 I	 haven’t	 slept	 at	 all,	 but	 not	 a
wink;	 I	 heard	 the	 clock	 strike	 almost	 every	 quarter;	 meanwhile	 I
dozed	 and	 some	 thought	 or	 other—which	 concerned	 you,	 I	 don’t
remember	 what	 it	 was—kept	 forcing	 its	 way	 into	my	 dozing	 like	 a
shuttle,	incessantly,	monotonously,	and	at	great	speed.
In	my	helplessness	in	the	middle	of	the	night	I	virtually	suffered	an
attack	of	madness;	the	images	became	uncontrollable,	everything	flew
apart	 until,	 in	 my	 extremity,	 the	 notion	 of	 a	 Napoleonic	 field
marshal’s	 black	 hat	 came	 to	 my	 rescue,	 descending	 on	 my
consciousness	and	holding	it	together	by	force.	My	heart	was	beating
quite	magnificently	at	 the	 time,	and	although	 the	window	was	wide
open	and	the	night	rather	cool	I	threw	off	the	blanket.	And	strangely
enough,	although	in	the	night	it	had	seemed	out	of	the	question	that	I
should	go	to	the	office,	 I	did	not	feel	particularly	ill	 in	the	morning,
apart	 from	 a	 pain	 in	 and	 around	 the	 heart.	 And	 when	 I	 got	 your
postcard	and	the	letter	at	the	office	(so	the	letter	written	on	Monday
afternoon	 arrived	 on	Wednesday	morning),	 I	 felt	 even	 better.—It	 is
typical	 of	 my	 thoroughly	 shaky	 condition	 that	 I	 should	 feel	 quite
different	from	one	day	to	the	next,	needless	to	say	on	the	foundation
of	a	continuously	unsatisfactory	basic	condition.
What	do	you	mean	by	my	 idea	about	your	visit	 to	Prague	having
been	nothing	but	foolishness?	Honestly,	Felice,	this	is	simply	not	true.
Of	course	you	would	have	to	be	invited	by	my	parents,	but	with	this
done	your	visit	would	really	be	the	simplest	thing	in	the	world.	And
so	lovely	besides,	which	is	the	decisive	factor.
I	have	been	most	fortunate	about	my	vacation.	Originally	I	meant	to
travel	for	a	fortnight,	and	spend	the	other	fortnight	at	a	sanatorium.
But	 since	 it	 became	 absolutely	 essential	 for	 me	 to	 spend	 the	 entire
time	in	a	sanatorium,	I	chose	one	at	Pegli	near	Genoa;	this,	owing	to
the	 proximity	 of	 Genoa,	 would	 have	 meant	 both	 travel	 and
sanatorium.	 But	 now	 I	 hear	 that	 the	 season	 at	 this	 particular
sanatorium	 doesn’t	 start	 until	 October	 1st,	 and	 I	 have	 to	 take	 my
holiday	 in	 September.	 So	 I	 shall	 probably	 have	 to	 go	 to	 the
San[atorium]	Hartungen	at	Riva,	on	Lake	Garda.113	Pity!
I	must	tell	you	more	about	Max’s	domestic	arrangements,	otherwise
you	may	misunderstand	me.
Listen,	 photography	 is	 very	much	 the	 fashion	 at	 seaside	 resorts;	 I



should	like	to	see	you	sitting	in	a	beach	chair,	for	instance,	or	in	the
sand;	couldn’t	I	be	sent	a	photograph?

Franz

Give	my	regards	to	Frl.	Danziger;	we	don’t	know	each	other,	but
she	 lives	next	 to	 the	person	dearest	 to	me,	 isn’t	 this	 connection
enough?	And	what	a	firm	handwriting	she	has!

August	7,	1913
My	 dearest	 Felice!	 What’s	 this?	 Headaches,	 fitful	 sleep,	 strange
dreams,	 and	 all	 this	 at	 a	 time	when	 you	 are	 supposed	 to	 be	 resting
from	 your	 many	 troubles?	 It	 is	 the	 continued	 uncertainty	 of	 our
situation,	that’s	all.	On	receipt	of	your	letter	tomorrow	I	shall	write	to
your	 father,	 and	 then	 we	 will	 both	 be	 calm	 and	 confident.	 Indeed,
we’ll	have	to	be,	you	especially,	for	it	is	then	that	your	real	hardship
awaits	 you:	 sharing	 your	 life	 with	 me,	 a	 man	 without	 self-control,
whom	you	may	still	not	visualize	as	he	really	is.	Poor,	dearest	Felice!
In	 gratitude	 for	 your	 courage,	 for	 still	 wanting	 to	 live	 with	 me
considering	what	you	know	about	me,	I	would	have	to	lie	at	your	feet
for	 a	 whole	 year.	 Once	 we	 are	 together	 I	 shall	 have	 plenty	 of
opportunities	to	show	my	gratitude;	I	only	hope,	Felice,	that	you	will
have	the	perception	to	see	my	gratitude	in	everything,	even	if,	instead
of	being	directed	immediately	toward	you,	it	is	simply	buried	within
myself.	In	a	word,	let	us	pray	you	have	the	gift	not	to	be	disappointed.
Please	 give	 a	 more	 detailed	 description,	 Felice,	 of	 your	 life	 at
Westerland.	I	have	a	general	idea,	but	would	like	to	gorge	myself	on
detail.	You	have	never	told	me	anything	specific	about	your	cousin.	I
imagine	 the	 two	 of	 you	won’t	 be	 alone	 for	more	 than	 the	 first	 few
days;	 since	 you	 all	 have	meals	 together	 you	 are	 bound	 to	make	 the
acquaintance	of	the	people	in	your	pension.	What	kind	of	people	are
they?	What	are	their	names?	Whom	do	you	like,	and	dislike?	And	did
nothing	worth	mentioning	happen	at	sea	(at	the	moment	I	am	reading
an	 old	 edition	 of	Robinson	Crusoe;	 here,	 needless	 to	 say,	 there	 is	 no
lack	of	excitement	at	 sea:	“However,	 the	storm	was	so	violent	 that	 I
saw	 what	 is	 not	 often	 seen,	 the	 master,	 the	 boatswain,	 and	 some
others	 more	 sensible	 than	 the	 rest,	 at	 their	 prayers,	 and	 expecting
every	moment	when	the	ship	would	go	to	the	bottom”)?	And	how	do
you	spend	each	part	of	the	day?	Do	you	read?	If	so,	what?	And	isn’t	it
quite	dangerous	to	bathe	if	one	cannot	swim?



The	promise	I	wrung	from	you	in	bianco,	for	which	I	thank	you	very
much,	 concerns	Müller	 exercises.	 In	 a	 few	 days	 I	 will	 send	 you	 the
System	 for	Women,	 and	 slowly,	 systematically,	 carefully,	 thoroughly,
and	daily	(for	after	all,	you	did	promise,	didn’t	you?),	you	will	begin
to	do	Müller	exercises,	report	on	them	continually,	and	so	give	me	a
great	deal	of	pleasure.114

Franz

[IN	 THE	 MARGIN]	Both	your	 letters	arrived	at	 the	 same	 time.	Go	on	with
this	regularity,	and	my	heart	will	also	beat	with	greater	regularity.
Wouldn’t	 you	 care	 to	 send	 me	 one	 of	 your	 parents’	 letters	 some
time,	so	that	I	can	see	how	they	write	to	you.	You	don’t	mention	the
prospective	vegetarian	housekeeping?	And	I	expected	jubilation.

August	8,	1913
I	thanked	you	yesterday	because	for	the	first	time	in	ages	I	got	letters
from	you	on	 two	 successive	days,	but	 today	again	 there	 is	no	news.
That	I	insist	on	a	letter	every	day	could	be	described	as	tyranny,	but	it
is	not,	or	rather	it	would	be	if	I	didn’t	mean	anything	to	you,	in	which
case,	of	course,	 it	 is	 tyranny.	But	you	should	write	 to	me,	and	write
regularly,	especially	now.	You	know	well	enough	how	I	suffer	without
letters.	 You	 know	 my	 present	 state	 of	 mind,	 how	 it	 is	 virtually
dependent	on	the	regularity	of	your	letters;	you	know	that	if	need	be	I
am	satisfied	with	a	few	hurried	lines;	you	know	you	promised	to	write
to	me	regularly	from	Westerland;	you	know	that	the	letter	to	which	I
am	expecting	an	answer	was	exceptionally	important	to	me;	you	know
I	am	bound	to	be	unusually	anxious	if	in	one	letter	you	tell	me	about
headaches	and	fitful	sleep,	 then	nothing	the	following	day—and	still
you	don’t	write	 to	me,	 in	 spite	of	all	my	daily	 letters	you	don’t	 feel
compelled	 to	 send	 a	 few	words.	Actually,	 I	 don’t	 even	 ask	 for	 daily
letters,	if	that’s	impossible;	I’ve	told	you	this	often	enough:	all	I	want	is
to	have	regular	letters,	but	even	this	is	denied	me.	And	you	can	bear	to	let
Wednesday	go	by	without	sending	me	so	much	as	a	picture	postcard,
although	you	know	that	on	Friday	I	tremble	from	one	mail	delivery	to
the	next.	Oh	dear,	what’s	the	good	of	you	dreaming	about	me	when	I
have	proof	that	you	don’t	give	me	a	thought	during	the	day?	And	it’s
not	 the	 first	 time.	 You	 are	 doing	 me	 a	 wrong,	 Felice,	 no	 matter
whether	 the	 reasons	 that	 prevent	 your	 writing	 are	 personal	 or
practical.



Franz

[LETTERHEAD:	Workers’	Accident	Insurance	Institute]
August	9,	1913

When	I	got	your	two	Wednesday	letters	this	morning	and	heard	that
one	of	them	had	actually	arrived	last	night,	I	was	going	to	send	you	a
telegram	 to	ask	you	 to	 forgive	me	 for	 yesterday’s	 letter.	But	when	 I
had	 read	both	 letters	 I	was	unable	 to	do	 so.	These	 letters	 are	 really
wrested	 from	time	and	 the	heart,	and	 fill	me	with	despair.	 I	am	not
quite	as	desperate	as	I	would	be	had	I	received	nothing,	this	I	admit,
yet	in	a	different	way	the	disaster	is	far	greater.	If	only,	when	in	this
frame	of	mind,	you	wrote	nothing	but	postcards,	so	that	one	…
This	much	I	wrote	at	the	office,	I	was	desperately	unhappy.	Frozen,
I	 just	 sat	over	 these	 letters	 in	which,	even	at	 the	100th	 reading	and
with	 immense	self-deception,	 I	 could	 find	nothing	 I	was	 looking	 for.
With	 only	 a	 few	 superficial	 changes,	 these	 could	 be	 letters	 to	 a
stranger,	or	 rather	 this	 is	what	 they	couldn’t	be,	 for	 in	 that	 case—it
seems	to	me—they	would	be	less	casual,	not	perhaps	in	the	way	they
are	written,	 but	 in	 feeling.	 Dearest	 Felice,	 I	 am	 not	 crazy,	 after	 all;
though	 I	 may	 be	 oversensitive,	 especially	 at	 this	 time	 and	 vis-à-vis
you,	because	 to	me	you	are	of	 irreplaceable	value,	 but	be	 that	 as	 it
may,	the	things	I	cannot	find	in	your	letters	are	things	that	are	simply
not	 there.	 It	 is	 again	 the	bewilderment	 I	 experienced	at	 times	when
we	were	 together	 (then,	 as	 by	 some	 inner	 compulsion,	 you	 seemed
overwhelmed	 by	 lassitude	 and	 inaccessible	 to	 me),	 and	 strangely
enough	experience	each	time	you	leave	Berlin.	It	was	the	same	when
you	went	 to	 Frankfurt,	 when	 you	were	 in	 Göttingen	 and	 Hamburg.
Does	 traveling	 act	 as	 a	 distraction,	 or	make	 you	more	 alert?	 These,
after	 all,	 are	 facts	 that	 cannot	 be	 denied,	 and	 yet	 can	 be	 explained.
When	I	compare	in	my	mind	the	very	first	letter	you	wrote	to	me	with
the	most	recent,	then,	Felice,	however	crazy	it	may	seem,	I	am	almost
bound	 to	choose	 the	 first	as	having	given	me	more	pleasure.	This	 is
but	 an	 isolated	 letter,	 and	 as	 recently	 as	 in	 the	 last	 but	 two	 you
showed	immeasurably	more	kindness	than	I	deserve.	However,	I	have
the	last	two	letters	as	well,	and	the	question	of	merit	does	not	arise.	If
you	 can	 give	 me	 an	 explanation,	 a	 satisfactory	 one,	 not	 merely
pointing	 to	 the	 figments	 of	 my	 imagination,	 then	 please,	 please,
Felice,	 do	 so.	Give	 an	 explanation	 for	 the	 few	 letters	written	 in	 this



fashion	 and	 for	 the	 number	 that	 were	 never	 written.	 Among	 the
written	ones,	those	from	Frankfurt	head	the	list,	then	comes	the	letter
from	 the	 zoo	 (written	 under	 the	 table),	 and	 then	 this	 last	 one	 of
Wednesday	evening,	 telling	me	nothing	 except	 that	 “Erna	 scolds	me
all	 day	 long,	 complaining	 that	 I	 spend	 all	 day	 in	 my	 room	writing
instead	 of	 going	 out	 into	 the	 fresh	 air.”	 Dearest	 Felice,	 what	 is	 the
meaning	of	this,	what	are	you	trying	to	say?
And	yet	I	must	confess	that	when	contemplating	the	picture	I	found

on	reaching	home,	I	feel	my	ties	with	you	to	be	immensely	powerful,
and	 if	 the	 memory	 of	 this	 morning’s	 suffering	 hadn’t	 given	me	 the
strength	 to	 record	 the	 above,	 to	 put	 down	what	 absolutely	must	 be
said,	 I	 would	 have	 preferred	 to	 say	 nothing	 but	 thank	 you,	 as	 I	 do
continually	when	contemplating	your	picture.

Yours,	Franz

August	10,	1913
At	last,	Felice,	I	have	your	telegram,	for	which	I	thank	you	very	much
and	ask	you	to	forgive	my	unjust	reproaches	and	the	spoiling	of	your
vacation,	for	which	I	may	be	to	blame.	Well,	I	went	to	the	office	today
to	collect	Friday’s	postcard.	(Nothing	from	Thursday	in	case	you	wrote
that	 day,	 but	 it	 may	 have	 been	 addressed	 to	 the	 apartment	 and	 so
won’t	arrive	till	tomorrow),	but	this	is	not	really	the	point;	after	all,	I
am	not	a	devil	superintending	your	writing;	it	is	just	that	I	take	fright
at	the	contents	of	your	letters,	which	really	do	suggest	that	I	am	such
a	 devil	who	 somehow	needs	 to	 be	 appeased	 to	 stop	 his	 tormenting.
This,	Felice,	is	what	recurs	in	everything	I	have	received	from	you	in
the	 past	 few	 days.	 Two	 letters	 ago:	 “You	 certainly	 cannot	 complain
now,	etc.”	In	the	last	one:	“Erna	scolds	me,	etc.”	On	today’s	postcard:
“To	stay	indoors	would	be	a	sin.…”	But	dearest	Felice!	Don’t	we	write
about	writing,	 the	way	others	 talk	about	money?	 Is	 the	 latter	worse
than	the	former?	It	would	be	awful	if	you	wrote	for	my	sake	only.
I	am	afraid	to	mail	this	letter,	perhaps	I	am	not	competent	to	judge,

and	 if	 I’m	 not,	 then	 again	 it	 is	 for	 the	 same	 reason,	 and	 so	 can	 be
justified.
Is	it	the	immense	distance	that	drives	you	from	me?	Are	these	your

true	feelings	which	had	temporarily	been	smothered	by	me?	But	you
are	 steadfast,	 able	 to	 see	 things	 clearly,	 you	 have	 yourself	 well	 in
hand—which	makes	 these	 ever-recurring	 intervals	 the	more	 serious,



the	more	significant.
Yours,	Franz

August	11,	1913
Your	 postcard	 from	 Kampen115	 arrived	 today.	 (Could	 Thursday’s
postcard	have	gone	astray,	like	the	one	from	Hamburg?)	If	I	am	to	tell
the	truth,	I	get	more	genuine	pleasure	from	a	postcard	like	this	than
from	 your	 recent	 letters.	Nothing	 bad	 can	 be	 read	 into	 it,	 and	with
some	self-deception	one	can	detect	something	good.	You	had	been	on
some	 pleasant	 expedition	 which	 someone	 (who	 is	 it?)	 finds
“enchanting.”	You	thought	about	me	a	little	and,	if	it	weren’t	for	what
had	gone	before,	I	could	be	perfectly	content.
This	is	not	a	question	of	momentary	satisfaction,	however,	and	least
of	all	my	own;	the	question	rather	is	this:	If	it	is	your	wish,	Felice,	to
take	upon	yourself	 the	 sacrifice	 of	 becoming	my	wife—I	have	made
every	effort	 in	accordance	with	 the	 truth	 to	prove,	down	 to	 the	 last
detail,	that	it	is	a	sacrifice—then,	unless	you	wish	to	condemn	us	both
to	endless	misery,	you	mustn’t	take	a	frivolous	view	of	your	affection
for	 me,	 let	 alone	 have	 no	 views	 about	 it.	 No	 one	 can	 expect	 your
feelings	 for	me	to	be	entirely	clear	 to	you,	but	you	yourself	must	be
sure	of	them.	But	faced	by	your	last	letters,	and	remembering	earlier
similar	periods,	I	despair	of	finding	that	assurance	in	you.	Somewhere
deeply	hidden	within	you	(I	can	think	of	no	other	explanation)	there
must	be	an	illusion,	which	from	time	to	time	stops	working,	and	this
must	at	least	make	you	suspect	its	presence,	yet	you	are	never	able	to
locate	it,	since	for	some	obscure	reason	you	are	not	looking	for	it.	Yet
this,	above	all,	would	be	your	duty.	It	may	be	but	a	minor	prejudice,
one	that	could	be	removed	with	ease,	simply	a	weakness,	yet	equally
it	may	be	 the	very	 thing	 that	now	keeps	you	 from	me	at	 times,	but
that	in	future	might	keep	you	from	me	altogether.	Or	is	there	nothing
that	 keeps	 you	 from	 me	 when,	 for	 example—and	 it	 isn’t	 the	 only
example—you	dispose	of	the	question	of	our	seeing	each	other	again
in	the	following	3	sentences:	“It	is	quite	out	of	the	question	for	me	to
come	 to	 Prague	 now.	 But	 what	 makes	 you	 say	 that	 you	 could	 not
possibly	come	to	Berlin	for	the	time	being?	What	about	the	Christmas
vacation?”	And	we	 are	 now	 in	August.—I	 know,	 Felice,	 that	what	 I
am	doing	now,	seen	from	the	outside,	is	dreadful.	It	may	be	the	worst
thing	 I	 have	 done	 to	 you,	 yet	 at	 the	 same	 time	 the	most	 necessary.



You	have	no	wish	to	hear	the	undertones	of	what	you	say—don’t	keep
to	 the	 one	 example—which	 is	 why	 I	 am	 repeating	 it	 for	 you	 once
again	in	a	loud	voice.

Franz

August	12,	1913
It	 fills	 me	 with	 horror,	 Felice,	 when	 I	 imagine	 that	 on	 a	 lovely
morning,	 after	 a	 reasonably	 good	 night,	 you	 sit	 at	 breakfast	 in
anticipation	of	a	pleasant	day	ahead,	and	morning	after	morning	you
are	 handed	my	 infernal	 letters,	 like	messages	 from	 the	 underworld.
But	what	can	I	do,	Felice?	In	your	last	 letters	and	postcards	I	get	no
feeling	of	your	nearness	to	me,	your	help,	your	definite	determination,
and	 unless	 I	 can	 be	 sure	 of	 that,	 I	 can	 effect	 no	 contact	 with	 your
parents,	 since	 you,	 you	 alone	 create	my	 only	 valid	 connection	with
people,	 and	 you	 alone	will	 be	 the	 one	 to	 create	 it	 in	 future.	 So	 I	 shall
have	 to	await	 your	 reply	 to	yesterday’s	 letter.	Don’t	 you	understand
my	position,	Felice?	My	own	suffering	is	far	greater	than	the	suffering
I	 inflict—but	 this,	 though	 it	 means	 a	 great	 deal,	 does	 not	 in	 itself
exonerate	me	in	any	way.

Yours,	Franz

[August	14,	1913]
Dearest	Felice!	Only	 in	 this	 last	 letter	do	 I	 recognize	you	again.	You
have	been	as	though	hidden	behind	clouds	as	recently	as	in	Monday’s
letter	 (which,	 probably	 owing	 to	 insufficient	 postage,	 I	 did	 not	 get
until	 today,	 Thursday)	 and	 in	 the	 first	 of	 Tuesday’s.	 I	 asked	myself
whether	I	have	the	evil	eye	for	being	dissatisfied	with	all	these	letters.
They	kept	 telling	me	about	 the	drawbacks	of	 the	Ullsteinhalle.	Who
would	doubt	the	difficulties	of	writing	there,	but	who	expects	you	to
write	there?	The	very	picture	of	the	Ullsteinhalle	was	enough	to	hurt
my	eyes.	You	wrote	in	pencil	anyway,	so	couldn’t	you	have	written	a
few	lines	at	breakfast	or	on	the	beach?	Moreover,	I	saw	various	signs
suggesting	 that	 you	 read	my	 letters	 very	 carelessly.	 One	 example:	 I
wrote	about	my	uncle	in	Madrid;	you	removed	him	to	Milan.	That	was
of	little	consequence,	but	you	might	just	as	well	have	removed	one	of
my	most	 serious	 scruples	 to	 some	 other	 quarter,	 without	 putting	 it
into	words,	and	without	my	noticing.



It	 was	 only	 your	 second	 Tuesday	 letter	 that	 somewhat	 reassured
me,	and	I	believe	it	is	once	more	my	Felice.	She	has	reappeared	again
at	 last.	 Perhaps	 it	 is	 just	 that	 you	 are	 tired,	 Felice.	 It	 would	 be	 a
miracle	 if	you	weren’t.	Well,	 I	won’t	 consider	any	other	 conceivable
possibility,	and	the	letter	to	your	parents	will	leave	at	the	same	time
as	this.	They	will	travel	together	as	far	as	Berlin.
The	 man	 in	 your	 pension	 should	 leave	 graphology	 alone.	 I	 am
certainly	not	“very	determined	in	my	behavior”	(unless	you	have	had
this	experience);	furthermore,	I	am	by	no	means	“extremely	sensual,”
but	have	a	magnificent,	inborn	capacity	for	asceticism;	I	am	not	good-
natured;	it’s	true	that	I	am	thrifty,	but	“from	necessity”—never;	as	for
being	 generous—no,	 certainly	 not;	 and	whatever	 else	 the	man	 said,
the	 things	 you	 couldn’t	 remember,	 will	 have	 been	 very	 much	 the
same.	Even	“artistic	interests”	is	not	true;	in	fact	of	all	the	erroneous
statements,	that	is	the	most	erroneous.	I	have	no	literary	interests,	but
am	made	of	literature,	I	am	nothing	else,	and	cannot	be	anything	else.
The	other	day	I	read	the	following	story	in	a	History	of	Devil	Worship:
“There	was	a	cleric	with	a	voice	so	sweet	and	so	beautiful	that	all	who
heard	it	were	filled	with	joy.	One	day	a	priest	heard	the	sweetness	of
these	 sounds	 and	 said:	 ‘This	 is	 not	 the	 voice	 of	 a	 man,	 but	 of	 the
devil.’	 In	 the	 presence	 of	 all	 the	 many	 admirers	 he	 exorcised	 the
demon	and	drove	him	out,	whereupon	the	corpse	(for	 this	body	had
been	 animated	 by	 the	 devil	 instead	 of	 a	 soul)	 disintegrated	 and
stank.”116	The	relationship	between	me	and	literature	is	similar,	very
similar	to	that,	except	that	my	literature	is	not	as	sweet	as	that	monk’s
voice.—To	 discover	 this	 from	my	 handwriting,	 however,	 one	would
certainly	have	to	be	a	very	astute	graphologist.
To	your	graphologist	I	now	add	a	critic.	The	other	day	a	review	of
Meditation	appeared	in	the	Literary	Echo.117	 It	 is	very	friendly,	but	 in
itself	 not	 otherwise	 noteworthy.	Only	 one	 remark	 is	 striking;	 in	 the
course	 of	 the	 discussion	 the	 reviewer	 mentions:	 “Kafka’s	 bachelor
art	…”	What	do	you	think	of	that,	Felice?
Briefly,	about	 the	other	points:	 I	absolutely	 insist	upon	 the	Müller
exercises,	I	am	mailing	the	book	today;	if	they	bore	you,	it	shows	you
are	not	doing	them	properly;	try	hard	to	do	them	exactly	as	prescribed
(progressing,	needless	to	say,	with	great	caution!),	and	their	immediately
noticeable	 effects	 will	 prevent	 you	 from	 being	 bored;	 you	 needn’t
worry	about	your	cooking;	while	she	is	asleep,	place	a	towel	carefully
over	your	cousin’s	face	when	she	talks	in	her	sleep.



Franz

August	15,	1913
And	 now,	 Felice,	 calm	 yourself.	 This	 is	 your	 vacation	 and	 it	 is
summer;	there	should	be	anxiety	neither	indoors	nor	out.	I	have	told
your	parents	the	bare	facts;118	it	was	not	easy	to	combine	the	essential
with	 the	 truthful	 in	 such	 a	 way	 as	 to	 make	 it	 both	 readable	 and
comprehensible	to	your	parents;	I	have	succeeded,	however,	if	only	in
part.	At	any	rate,	between	us	 there	will	be	no	more	 talk	about	 fears
and	worries,	whatever	may	be	left	of	them	must	be	crushed	between
our	 teeth.	 Undoubtedly	 the	 reproaches	 in	 my	 recent	 letters	 were
largely	 unjustified;	 I	 don’t	wish	 to	 discuss	 them	 in	 detail,	 but	 these
reproaches	were	due	not	merely	to	hurt	feelings	over	certain	passages
in	your	 letters,	 they	 sprang	 from	 some	deeper	anxiety.	 Let	us	 forget
about	 them!	 I	 have	 found	 a	way	 to	 stop	 tormenting	 you	with	 these
things.	 I	 write	 down	 what	 is	 most	 urgent,	 but	 do	 not	 send	 it	 off;
perhaps	 there	 will	 come	 a	 time	 when	 we	 shall	 be	 able	 to	 read	 it
together	 in	 peace,	when	 perhaps,	 perhaps,	 it	 can	 all	 be	 disposed	 of
more	easily	and	quickly	by	one	reassuring	look	and	a	squeeze	of	the
hand	 than	 in	 any	 letter	 on	 its	 leisurely	 journey	 from	 Westerland.
Consider	these	latest	sufferings	I	have	inflicted,	Felice,	as	part	of	the
sacrifice,	already	begun,	which	the	union	with	me	entails.	This	is	all	I
can	say.	Include	it	in	your	considerations	and	in	your	reply	when	your
parents	question	you	about	my	letter.
And	 from	 now	 on	 don’t	 write	 to	 me	 so	 much.	 A	 hectic
correspondence	 is	a	sign	that	something	 is	wrong.	Peace	requires	no
letters.	Nothing	in	itself	will	change	through	my	becoming	your	fiancé
in	the	eyes	of	the	whole	world,	but	at	least	it	is	the	signal	for	the	end
of	all	outward	expressions	of	doubts	and	fears.	Consequently	there	is
no	further	need	for	as	many	letters;	there	is	need	only	for	the	utmost
regularity	 in	writing,	a	regularity	calculated	to	a	hair’s	breadth.	You
will	be	amazed	what	a	poor	though	punctual	letter	writer	I	shall	turn
into	 once	 I	 am	your	 fiancé.	 There	will	 be	 increasingly	 stronger	 ties,
compared	to	which	letters	will	be	ridiculous.

Franz

August	18,	1913
Dearest	 Felice,	 you	 are	 not	 falling	 ill,	 are	 you?	 You	 don’t	 feel	 too



well?	 What	 does	 this	 mean?	 And	 why	 don’t	 you	 explain	 it	 more
thoroughly?	Must	 I	 blame	myself	 for	 making	 you	 ill	 by	 tormenting
you?	 Is	 there	no	other	 cause?	And	what	 is	 it?	And	you	 are	 still	 not
sleeping	well?	 Honestly,	my	 sleeplessness	 should	 be	 enough	 for	 the
two	of	us.	Do	you	get	enough	rest?	Are	you	eating	good	and	sensible
food?	Whatever	 is	 the	meaning	 of	 your	 not	 feeling	 too	 well?	 Don’t
write	 any	more	 letters,	 postcards	 only,	 but	 please,	 Felice,	 add	 some
short	 explanation	 or	 a	 little	 hope	 to	 such	 news	 as	 that	 you	 are	 not
very	well.	If	you	write	merely	that	you	are	not	feeling	too	well,	I	can
stare	at	that	for	hours	without	finding	an	explanation,	at	least	without
finding	a	sensible	explanation.	And	don’t	send	cards	with	those	little
pictures,	but	proper	picture	postcards,	so	that	I	can	get	some	idea	of
where	and	how	you	live;	for	after	all,	this	is	the	most	important	thing
to	me.
The	mail	 is	 having	 fun	with	 us	 again.	 I	 have	 only	 now,	Monday,
received	 your	 Friday	 letter;	 and	 the	 Flaubert,	 which	 really	 should
have	reached	you	by	last	Monday,	also	doesn’t	seem	to	have	arrived
until	now.	What	life	there	is	in	that	book!	If	one	clings	to	it,	this	life
seeps	into	one,	whoever	one	may	be.
Yesterday	 Max	 returned	 from	 his	 travels;	 I	 went	 to	 see	 him,	 his
parents	were	 there	 too,	 and	 from	 them	 I	 heard	 the	 great	 news	 that
someone	 from	 somewhere—no	 one	 would	 ever	 tell	 me	 who—had
congratulated	Frau	Brod.	I	heard	nothing,	understood	nothing,	had	a
headache	from	a	sleepless	night,	and	settled	down	to	staring	vacantly
around	 the	 room.	 Although	 this	 was	 but	 the	 expression	 of
wretchedness,	it	was	at	the	same	time	the	expression	of	sorrow	at	the
thought	of	 strangers	 intruding	or	wishing	 to	 intrude	 in	my	affairs,	 a
right	 that,	 even	 with	 the	 utmost	 consideration	 for	 their	 friendship,
sympathetic	 interest,	 kindness,	 and	 readiness	 to	 help,	 I	 cannot
concede	at	any	time.
The	photographs!	Felice.	The	photographs!	One	grows	impatient!
Look,	what	a	beautiful	poem	I	have	received,	it	has	just	appeared	in
März.119	Please	 return	 it	 to	me.	Well,	 that’s	where	we	 lay	 two	years
ago.	I	have	forgotten	the	name	of	the	village,	quite	close	to	Lugano.—
And	now	see	to	it	that	you	get	well.	Your	cousin	and	your	girl	friend
should	do	nothing	but	wait	on	you	and	look	after	you.	If	only	I	could
take	part	in	some	way.

Franz



August	20,	1913
Now	 you	 see,	 Felice,	 how	 right	 I	 was	 for	 reproaching	 you	 for	 not
thinking	 of	 me	 enough.	 Or	 were	 you	 thinking	 of	 me	 when	 you
ventured	 out	 far	 enough	 to	 be	 in	 danger?	 No,	 I	 was	 not	 in	 your
thoughts	 then	at	 all.	And	are	you	all	 right	 again	now?	And	you	are
still	having	palpitations!	No,	Felice,	I	don’t	want	you	to	take	after	me
in	 this	 respect.	 Let	my	 heart	 carry	 on	 the	way	my	worn-out	 nerves
allow,	but	let	your	heart	continue	on	its	natural	peaceful	course.	And
how	can	a	sore	throat	be	the	result	of	a	shock?	This	isn’t	very	clear.
Have	you	seen	a	doctor?	Tell	me,	Felice,	had	you	not	more	resistance
before	 you	 knew	me?	Am	 I	 not	more	 to	 blame	 than	 all	 the	waves?
Even	if,	during	this	past	year,	I	had	tormented	you	but	half	as	much	as
I	have	tormented	myself—with	the	result	that	my	hair,	to	your	future
horror	more	than	mine,	 is	getting	whiter	every	day.	You	once	wrote
that	 you	 were	 afraid	 of	 having	 a	 bald-headed	 suitor,	 and	 now	 an
almost	white-haired	man	offers	you	his	hand	in	marriage.
Today’s	letter	reminds	me	that	in	one	respect	at	least	we	are	exact

opposites.	 You	 enjoy,	 you	 need	 verbal	 exchanges;	 personal	 contact
does	 you	 good;	writing	 confuses	 you;	 to	 you	 it	 is	 no	more	 than	 an
imperfect	substitute,	usually	not	a	substitute	at	all;	 there	were	many
letters	you	really	did	not	answer,	and	considering	your	kindness	and
willingness,	undoubtedly	for	one	reason	only—that	writing	is	contrary
to	your	nature,	whereas	you	would	have	been	quite	ready	to	express
your	opinions	on	this	or	that	by	word	of	mouth.
In	my	case	it	is	the	exact	opposite.	Talking	is	altogether	against	my

nature.	Whatever	 I	may	 say	 is	 wrong,	 in	my	 sense.	 For	me,	 speech
robs	 everything	 I	 say	 of	 its	 seriousness	 and	 importance.	 To	 me	 it
seems	 impossible	 that	 it	 should	 be	 otherwise,	 since	 speech	 is
continuously	 influenced	 by	 a	 thousand	 external	 factors	 and	 a
thousand	 external	 constraints.	 Hence	 I	 am	 silent	 not	 only	 from
necessity,	 but	 likewise	 from	 conviction.	 Writing	 is	 the	 only
appropriate	form	of	expression	for	me,	and	will	continue	to	be	so	even
when	we	are	together.	But	for	you,	dependent	as	you	are	by	nature	on
speaking	and	listening,	will	my	writing—whatever	may	be	granted	to
me—suffice	 as	my	main,	my	only	means	 of	 communication	 (though
probably	addressed	to	no	one	but	you)	?

Franz



August	21,	1913
Dear	 Felice,	 I	 got	 home	 too	 late	 yesterday	 to	 reply	 by	 telegram	 to
yours	of	yesterday.	In	any	case	you	must	have	received	my	letter	by
yesterday	evening.
I	 was	 prevented	 from	writing	 to	 you	 on	 Sunday	 in	 the	 following
manner:	 I	 was	 wandering	 around	 the	 streets	 on	 my	 own	 when	 I
remembered	 that	we	had	said	and	written	very	 little,	and	mostly	by
innuendo,	about	the	most	 important	subject,	or	at	 least	(how	unsure
my	 hand	 is	 today,	 isn’t	 it?	 But	 I	 can	write	 quite	 steadily	 too,	 see!)
about	a	subject	connected	with	this	matter	of	the	greatest	importance.
What	could	be	more	natural	than	that	I	should	make	speed	for	home
and	 write	 everything	 down	 as	 lucidly	 as	 possible	 and	 lay	 it	 before
you.	It	was	evening,	which	helped	to	enhance	the	lucidity	of	what	had
to	be	written.	What	did	 I	 care	about	 sleep!	Then	 I	met	a	 friend;	we
began	to	talk,	a	soothing,	diverting,	meaningless	conversation,	and	by
the	time	I	had	got	rid	of	him	my	thoughts	had	become	more	human;	I
thought	of	the	torments	I	had	been	inflicting	upon	you	all	along,	and
for	the	time	being	left	this	most	important	letter	unwritten.	If	I	sinned
by	 not	 writing—which	 no	 doubt	 I	 did—I	 sinned	 with	 the	 best	 of
intentions.	And	now,	on	reading	 that	you	had	spent	Monday	 in	bed,
and	could	have	done	with	anything	rather	than	worries,	I	blessed	my
friend.
Whether	 you	 ought	 to	 write	 to	 my	 mother?	 Surely	 your	 father
should	answer	my	 letter	 first.	But	after	 that,	 if	all	has	gone	well,	do
whichever	you	prefer,	write	to	my	mother	or	wait	for	her	to	write	to
you.	I	have	no	feelings	about	it.	If	you	want	her	to	write	to	you	first,
then	she	will	write	to	you	first.
It	 is	 unlikely	 that	 I	 shall	 be	 coming	 to	Berlin	before	my	vacation,
Felice.	 First	 of	 all,	 you	would	 derive	 little	 pleasure	 from	me	 in	my
present	 state	 (by	 which	 I	 do	 not	 mean	 to	 anticipate	 future
impressions).	 Secondly,	 the	 engagement	period	appeals	 to	neither	of
us	 (though	 possibly	 for	 different	 reasons).	 There	 is	 something	 to	 be
said	for	oriental	marriage	customs	where	the	bridegroom	does	not	set
eyes	 on	 the	 bride	 until	 the	 wedding.	 The	 veil	 is	 raised:	 “So	 that’s
Felice!”	 and	 he	 is	 at	 her	 feet.	 But	 she,	 at	 sight	 of	 the	 white-haired
man,	starts	back.	Thirdly,	I	want	to	keep	my	vacation	time	intact,	and
there	isn’t	another	free	Sunday.	These	are	the	general	reasons.	Do	you
accept	them?

Franz



[IN	THE	MARGIN]	The	photographs!	And	your	sister’s	letter!

August	22,	1913
Nothing	has	been	 left	undiscussed,	Felice,	have	no	 fear;	but	perhaps
the	most	important	subject	was	not	fully	grasped	by	you.	This	is	not	a
reproach,	 not	 a	 vestige	 of	 a	 reproach;	 you	 have	 done	 everything
humanly	possible,	but	what	you	haven’t	got	you	cannot	grasp.	No	one
can.	For	 it	 is	 I	alone	who	carry	all	anxieties	and	fears	within	me,	as
alive	 as	 snakes;	 I	 alone	 who	 scrutinize	 them	 constantly,	 and	 only	 I
know	what	they	are.	You	know	about	them	only	from	me,	only	from
my	letters,	and	what	you	learn	about	them	from	these	letters	bears—
in	 its	 horror,	 persistence,	 magnitude,	 and	 invincibility—even	 less
relation	to	reality	than	does	my	writing,	which	heaven	knows	is	little
enough.	 All	 this	 I	 realize	when	 reading	 yesterday’s	 letter,	 so	 full	 of
kindness	and	confidence;	all	 recollections	of	me	 in	Berlin	must	have
been	forgotten	when	you	wrote.	The	life	that	awaits	you	is	not	that	of
the	happy	couples	you	 see	 strolling	along	before	you	 in	Westerland,
no	lighthearted	chatter	arm	in	arm,	but	a	monastic	life	at	the	side	of	a
man	 who	 is	 peevish,	 miserable,	 silent,	 discontented,	 and	 sickly;	 a	 man
who,	and	this	will	seem	to	you	akin	to	madness,	is	chained	to	invisible
literature	by	invisible	chains	and	screams	when	approached	because,
so	he	claims,	someone	is	touching	those	chains.
Your	father	is	hesitant	with	his	reply,	which	is	understandable,	but
that	he	should	be	hesitant	with	his	questions	as	well	seems	to	me	to
prove	 that	 his	 doubts	 are	 only	 general	 ones,	 which	 by	 obtaining
information—quite	untruthfully—would	be	cleared	up	in	no	time;	and
that	 he	 overlooks	 the	 one	 passage	 in	 my	 letter	 that	 could	 give	 me
away,	because	 it	 lies	 entirely	outside	his	 own	experience.	This	must
not	 be	 allowed,	 I	 told	 myself	 all	 night,	 and	 proceeded	 to	 draft	 a
letter120	 that	would	make	 it	clear	 to	him.	 It	 isn’t	 finished,	nor	will	 I
send	it;	it	was	but	an	outburst,	which	didn’t	even	relieve	me.

Franz

August	24,	1913
Dearest	Felice,	the	maid	woke	me	from	my	semistupor	and	handed	me
your	 letter.	 It	 was	 like	 an	 adjunct	 to	 the	 garish	 images	 that	 pass
through	my	head	while	in	that	continuous	half-awake	state	in	which	I



now	spend	all	my	nights.	But	at	whatever	hour	of	the	night	the	maid
were	to	bring	your	letter,	it	would	at	all	times	fall	in	quite	naturally
with	 my	 thoughts	 which	 are	 concerned	 solely	 with	 you	 and	 our
future.
Poor	dearest	Felice!	That	I	suffer	more	with	you	than	with	anyone
else,	and	torment	you	more	than	anyone	else,	is	both	terrible	and	just.
I	 break	 in	 half,	 so	 to	 speak.	 I	 duck	 to	 avoid	my	 own	 blows,	 while
taking	 the	 greatest	 pains	 to	 deliver	 them.	 If	 this	 isn’t	 the	 worst
possible	omen	for	us!
Not	a	bent	for	writing,	my	dearest	Felice,	not	a	bent,	but	my	entire
self.	A	bent	 can	be	uprooted	and	crushed.	But	 this	 is	what	 I	 am;	no
doubt	I	myself	can	be	uprooted	and	crushed,	but	what	will	happen	to
you?	You	are	abandoned,	yet	live	at	my	side.	You	will	feel	abandoned
if	I	live	the	way	I	have	to,	and	you	will	be	truly	abandoned	if	I	don’t
live	that	way.	Not	a	bent,	not	a	bent!	The	very	smallest	detail	of	my
life	 is	determined	by	and	hinges	on	 it.	You	say	you	will	get	used	 to
me,	 dearest;	 but	 amid	 how	much	 perhaps	 unbearable	 suffering!	Are
you	capable	of	actually	visualizing	a	life	in	which,	during	autumn	and
winter	at	least,	as	I	have	told	you	before,	we	shall	have	but	one	hour	a
day	 together?	 A	 life	 in	 which,	 as	 a	 married	 woman,	 you	 will	 find
loneliness	 harder	 to	 bear	 than	 you	 can	 possibly	 imagine	 now	 from
afar,	as	a	single	girl	 in	familiar	and	fitting	surroundings?	You	would
shrink	 back	 in	 derision	 from	 the	 idea	 of	 a	 convent,	 yet	 you
contemplate	 living	 with	 a	 man	 whose	 natural	 ambition	 (and
incidentally	his	circumstances,	too)	oblige	him	to	lead	a	monastic	life?
Let	us	be	calm,	Felice,	calm!	I	had	a	calm,	carefully	considered	letter
from	your	father	today,	in	contrast	to	which	the	state	I	am	in	seemed
like	madness,	outside	this	world.	And	yet	your	father’s	 letter	 is	calm
merely	because	 I	have	deceived	him.	While	his	 letter	 is	 friendly	and
open,	mine	was	nothing	but	a	screen	concealing	the	most	lamentable
ulterior	 motives	 with	 which	 I	 am	 continuously	 compelled	 to	 attack
you,	my	dearest	Felice,	whose	curse	I	am.	Your	father,	quite	naturally,
makes	no	decisions,	but	 leaves	the	decision	to	a	discussion	with	you
and	your	mother.	Be	honest	with	your	 father,	Felice,	 since	 I	haven’t
been.	Tell	him	who	 I	am,	 show	him	some	 letters,	with	his	help	 step
out	of	the	accursed	circle	into	which,	blinded	by	love	as	I	was	and	am,
I	forced	you	with	letters,	pleas,	and	supplications.

Franz



August	24,	1913
You	ask	how	I	have	been?	My	condition	is	such	that	since	I	had	your
telegram—that	is,	for	4	days—the	letter	to	your	father	has	been	lying,
completed,	in	my	drawer.
The	moment	I	had	read	your	 letter	 today	I	went	next	door,	where
my	parents	always	have	their	brief	game	of	cards	after	luncheon,	and
asked	at	once:	“Father,	so	what	do	you	think	about	my	wanting	to	get
married?”	These	were	the	first	words	I	had	uttered	to	my	father	about
you.	Needless	to	say,	my	mother	has	told	him	everything	she	knows.
Have	I	already	told	you	that	I	admire	my	father?	You	know	that	he	is
my	enemy,	and	I	his,	as	is	determined	by	our	temperaments,	but	apart
from	this	my	admiration	for	him	as	a	man	is	perhaps	as	great	as	my
fear	of	him.	 I	can	manage	to	avoid	him;	but	 ignore	him,	never.	Like
every	one	of	our	conversations	(but	 it	wasn’t	a	conversation;	 like	all
our	so-called	conversations	it	consisted	of	uncontrolled	remarks	on	my
side,	 and	 powerful	 orations	 on	 his)—like	 every	 one	 of	 our
conversations	this	one	started	with	irritable	remarks	on	his	side,	and
the	registering	of	his	irritability	on	mine.	I	feel	unable	at	present,	too
weak,	 to	 describe	 the	 whole	 thing,	 not	 that	 I	 had	 been	 especially
unnerved	 by	 this	 conversation;	 after	 all,	 I	 am	 well	 aware	 of	 my
inferiority	vis-à-vis	my	father,	 I	realize	 it,	and	it	certainly	affects	my
father	more	than	it	affects	me.	The	substance	of	his	oration	centered
around	 the	 difficulties	 in	 which,	 by	 marrying,	 I	 would	 find	 myself
with	 regard	 to	 my	 income—difficulties	 that,	 owing	 to	 my	 lack	 of
purpose	(here	came	horrible	accusations	about	my	having	persuaded
him	 to	 invest	 in	 the	 unsuccessful	 asbestos	 factory,	 to	 which	 I	 no
longer	paid	any	attention),	 I	would	not	be	able	 to	 endure,	 let	 alone
resolve.	As	an	additional	argument,	with	some	bearing	on	my	affairs
which	is	no	longer	quite	clear	to	me	now,	he	addressed	his	reproaches
partly	to	thin	air,	partly	to	my	mother,	and	partly	to	me	as	well,	for
my	 second	 sister’s	marriage	with	which,	 from	 the	 financial	 point	 of
view,	 he	 is	 (and	with	 good	 reason)	 dissatisfied.	 About	 half	 an	 hour
passed	 in	 this	 fashion.	 Finally,	 as	 is	 usual	 toward	 the	 end	 of	 these
scenes,	he	becomes	gentle,	not	really	gentle,	but	relatively	gentle,	so
that	one	is	helpless	when	confronted	by	him,	above	all	I	myself,	who
haven’t	a	word	to	say	to	him	that	is	genuinely	felt.	(But	perhaps	the
strangest	 of	 all	 in	my	 relationship	with	 him	 is	 that	 I	 am	 capable	 of
feeling	and	suffering	to	the	utmost	not	with	him,	but	within	him.)	And
in	 the	end	he	 said	 (the	 transitions	are	omitted	 from	my	description)



he	 was	 prepared,	 if	 I	 so	 wished,	 to	 go	 to	 Berlin,	 see	 your	 family,
advance	 what	 in	 his	 opinion	 are	 irrefutable	 objections,	 and,	 if	 a
marriage	were	agreed	upon	in	spite	of	these	objections,	he	would	say
no	more.
Now,	 Felice,	 do	 intervene	 in	 this	 discussion	 with	 my	 father.	 You
will	 really	have	 to	give	me	a	 little	 support.	My	 father,	after	all,	 is	a
stranger	to	you.	So,	for	a	beginning,	would	it	be	a	good	thing	for	him
to	come	to	Berlin?	Is	this	the	appropriate	moment?	And	how	is	 it	 to
be	arranged?	Answers	are	needed	here	as	swift	and	astute	as	snakes.

Franz

[Presumably	during	the	night	from]	August	[24	to]	25,	1913
Dearest	 Felice,	 I	 may	 not	 have	 put	 things	 quite	 accurately	 this
afternoon.	I	rely	so	much	on	the	moment	and	its	influences.	So	try	to
understand	me!	What	my	father	said	 is	consent,	after	his	 fashion,	as
far	as	he	can	give	his	consent	to	anything	I	want.	He	talks	about	his
children’s	happiness	being	close	to	his	heart,	and	he	hardly	ever	tells	a
deliberate	lie,	he	has	too	strong	a	character	for	that.	But	the	fears	that
lie	behind	it—that’s	another	matter.	In	this	respect	he	may	be	rather
like	your	mother:	he	 foresees	catastrophe	everywhere.	When	he	was
younger	and	still	had	complete	confidence	in	himself	and	his	health,
these	 fears	 were	 not	 so	 pronounced,	 least	 of	 all	 when	 dealing	 with
anything	he	had	 started	 and	 carried	 out	 himself.	 But	 today	he	 fears
everything,	 and,	 horrible	 as	 it	 may	 be,	 these	 fears,	 at	 any	 rate	 in
important	matters,	are	invariably	confirmed.	These	constant	warnings
mean	no	more	in	the	end	than	that	happiness	is	a	rare	thing,	and	this,
after	all,	is	a	fact.	But	then	my	father	has	worked	hard	all	his	life,	and
from	 nothing	 has	 made,	 comparatively	 speaking,	 something.	 This
progress,	 however,	 came	 to	 an	 end	 years	 ago,	 when	 his	 daughters
were	grown	up,	and	now,	owing	to	their	marriages,	it	has	turned	into
a	 frightful	 never-ending	 decline.	 My	 father	 has	 the	 feeling	 that	 his
sons-in-law	 as	well	 as	 his	 own	 children,	 save	 for	me	 at	 present,	 are
permanently	 around	 his	 neck.	 This	 feeling,	 alas,	 is	 completely
justified,	 and	 enormously	 intensified	 by	 my	 father’s	 illness,	 a
hardening	of	the	arteries.	Now	he	reasons	as	follows:	if	I	marry,	I	who
so	far	have	not	been	included	in	these	worries,	I	am	bound	to	get	into
financial	 difficulties,	 if	 not	 at	 once,	 then	 certainly	 in	 2	 years’	 time;
and	 then,	 however	much	 I	may	deny	 it	 now,	 I	would	 come	 to	him,



almost	paralyzed	with	worry	as	he	is,	for	help;	or,	if	I	didn’t,	he	would
still	 try	somehow	to	provide	 it,	 thus	hastening	his	own	ruin	and	the
ruin	 of	 all	 those	 whom	 he	 believes	 to	 be	 dependent	 on	 him.	 You
should	see	him	in	this	light,	Felice.	But	now,	after	all	this,	allow	me—
and	this	 is	 something	 I	have	not	dared	 to	 imagine	 for	a	 long	 time—
allow	me	to	give	you	a	long,	calm	kiss,	as	calm	as	possible.

Yours,	Franz

If	only	one	could	somehow	reassure	him,	at	least	on	this	one	point!	I
have	no	proper	appreciation	of	money	(I	may	have	inherited	from
my	 father	 avarice	 in	 little	 things,	 but	 not,	 alas,	 his
acquisitiveness),	 and	 even	 less	 for	 the	 necessities	 of	 life.	 If	 my
father	tells	me	we’ll	get	into	financial	difficulties,	I	believe	it;	and
if	you	tell	me	we	won’t	get	into	difficulties,	I	believe	it	even	more
readily.	Anyway,	I	can’t	argue	about	it	with	my	father;	this	would
require	a	far	sharper	tongue	than	mine.

And	please,	Felice,	do	write	regularly	in	these	trying	times!

Brühl	is	a	terrible	man.	First	he	embezzles,	then	he	has	an	affair,
or	 are	 the	 two	 connected?	Haven’t	most	 of	 the	 children	 started
earning	a	living?

August	27,	1913
If	 you	 are	my	 guardian	 angel—and	 every	 day	 I	 am	more	 convinced
that	you	are—then	 I	have	been	without	a	guardian	angel	 for	a	 long
time	 now.	 I	 think	 I	 shall	 have	 a	 lot	 to	 say	 to	 you	 in	 reply	 to
tomorrow’s	letter.	But	first	I	shall	have	to	see	what	is	in	the	letter.

Franz

[LETTERHEAD:	Workers’	Accident	Insurance	Institute]
[August	28,	1913]

Felice,	today	I	got	your	letter,	the	letter-card,	and	the	letter	from	your
father.	 You	 must	 have	 had	 letters	 from	 me	 on	 both	 Sunday	 and
Monday,	 and,	 according	 to	 your	 letter	 you	 seem	 to	 have	 received
them,	 yet	 you	 do	 not	 reply	 to	 them.	 Nor	 does	 your	 father’s	 letter



contain	the	slightest	suggestion	that	you	have	discussed	with	him	that
aspect	of	marriage	which	might	be	hazardous	for	you.	But	he	has	to
be	 told,	 for	 he	 is	 not	 only	 concerned	 indirectly,	 he	 is	 concerned
directly.	 If	 only	 I	 could	 talk,	 I	would	 come	 to	Berlin,	but	 I	 can’t,	 so
have	 to	 write,	 and	 in	 the	 enclosed	 letter	 to	 your	 father	 I	 have	 put
down	 very	 briefly	 and	 superficially	 all	 that	 has	 to	 be	 said.	 Please,
please,	dearest	Felice,	do	give	him	this	letter!	It	has	to	be.121

Franz

My	mother?	For	the	 last	3	evenings,	ever	since	she	began	to	suspect
my	troubles,	she	has	begged	me	to	get	married	whatever	happens;
she	wants	to	write	to	you;	she	wants	to	come	to	Berlin	with	me,	she
wants	goodness	knows	what!	And	hasn’t	the	remotest	idea	what	my
needs	are.

To	Felice’s	father,	Herr	Carl	Bauer
[August	28,	1913]

Dear	Herr	Bauer,
Now	that	 I	have	extracted	 from	you	your	 two	kind	 letters,	 I	don’t
know	whether	you	will	have	 the	patience	and	the	desire	 to	 listen	 to
what	follows.	But	I	do	know	that	I	have	to	say	it.	I	would	have	to	say
it	even	if	your	letters	had	not	inspired	me	with	the	confidence	I	now
have	in	you.
What	I	 told	you	in	my	first	 letter	about	my	relationship	with	your
daughter	 is	 true,	 and	 will	 remain	 so.	 But	 apart	 from	 one	 allusion
which	may	have	escaped	your	notice,	something	decisive	was	missing.
Perhaps	 you	 thought	 there	was	 no	 need	 to	 comment	 on	 it,	 because
you	believe	 that	 coming	 to	 grips	with	my	 character	 is	 entirely	 your
daughter’s	 affair	 and	 had	 already	 been	 achieved.	 This	 is	 not	 so.	 At
times	 I	 used	 to	 think	 that	 it	 had,	 but	 again	 and	 again	 it	 turned	out
that	it	had	not	happened,	and	could	not	happen.	I	have	deluded	your
daughter	with	my	 letters;	 as	 a	 rule	 I	have	not	meant	 to	deceive	her
(although	 sometimes	 I	 have,	 because	 I	 loved	her,	 and	 love	 her,	 and
have	 been	 terribly	 aware	 of	 our	 incompatibility),	 and	 perhaps	 by
doing	just	this,	I	blinded	her.	I	really	don’t	know.
You	know	your	own	daughter:	she	is	a	gay,	healthy,	self-confident
girl,	who	in	order	to	live	should	be	surrounded	by	gay,	healthy,	and
lively	people.	You	know	me	only	 from	my	visit	 (I	was	about	 to	add



that	this	should	be	enough),	and	I	cannot	repeat	what	I	have	told	your
daughter	 about	myself	 in	 some	 500	 letters.	 But	 please	 consider	 this
one	 important	 fact:	 my	whole	 being	 is	 directed	 toward	 literature;	 I
have	followed	this	direction	unswervingly	until	my	30th	year,	and	the
moment	I	abandon	it	I	cease	to	live.	Everything	I	am,	and	am	not,	is	a
result	 of	 this.	 I	 am	 taciturn,	 unsociable,	 morose,	 selfish,	 a
hypochondriac,	and	actually	in	poor	health.	Fundamentally	I	deplore
none	of	this:	it	is	the	earthly	reflection	of	a	higher	necessity.	(What	I
am	really	capable	of	is	not	the	problem	here,	and	has	no	connection
with	it.)	I	live	within	my	family,	among	the	kindest,	most	affectionate
people—and	am	more	strange	than	a	stranger.	In	recent	years	I	have
spoken	 hardly	more	 than	 twenty	words	 a	 day	 to	my	mother,	 and	 I
exchange	 little	 more	 than	 a	 daily	 greeting	 with	 my	 father.	 To	 my
married	 sisters	 and	 brothers-in-law	 I	 do	 not	 speak	 at	 all,	 although	 I
have	nothing	against	them.	I	lack	all	sense	of	family	life.
And	is	your	daughter,	whose	healthy	nature	has	destined	her	for	a
happy	married	life,	to	live	with	this	kind	of	man?	Is	she	to	tolerate	a
monastic	existence	with	a	person	who,	though	he	loves	her	as	he	can
never	 love	 anyone	 else,	 spends	 most	 of	 his	 time	 in	 his	 room	 or
wandering	 about	 by	 himself—simply	 because	 of	 his	 irrevocable
vocation?	 Is	 she	 to	 tolerate	 a	 life	utterly	divorced	 from	her	parents,
her	 family,	 and	 almost	 any	 other	 social	 contact—because	 I,	 who
would	lock	my	door	against	my	best	friend,	cannot	imagine	any	other
kind	 of	 married	 life?	 Could	 she	 stand	 this?	 And	 what	 for?	 For	 my
writing,	which	is	highly	problematic	in	her	eyes	and	perhaps	even	in
mine?	And	for	this	she	is	to	live	alone	in	a	foreign	town,	in	a	marriage
that	may	 turn	out	 to	be	a	 relationship	of	 love	and	 friendship	 rather
than	a	real	marriage?
I	 have	 said	 the	minimum	 of	 what	 I	 intended	 to	 say.	 Above	 all:	 I
want	to	make	no	excuses	for	myself.	On	our	own,	your	daughter	and	I
could	find	no	solution:	I	love	her	too	much,	and	she	cannot	see	me	as
I	am.	And	perhaps	she	wants	the	impossible	only	out	of	compassion,
no	matter	how	much	she	may	deny	it.	Well,	now	we	are	three.	You	be
the	judge!

Very	sincerely	yours,	Dr.	F.	Kafka

August	30,	1913
Dearest	 Felice,	 you	 don’t	 know	 me,	 you	 don’t	 know	 me	 in	 my



baseness,	and	even	this	baseness	can	be	traced	to	that	core	which	you
can	call	literature,	or	anything	you	like.	What	a	wretched	writer,	and
how	 angry	 I	 am	 with	 myself	 to	 think	 that	 I	 have	 been	 unable	 to
convince	you	of	 it.	 (Since	early	morning,	and	even	now,	my	hand	is
pressed	against	my	left	temple,	otherwise	I	couldn’t	function.)
What	 is	 stopping	me	 can	 hardly	 be	 said	 to	 be	 facts;	 it	 is	 fear,	 an
insurmountable	 fear,	 fear	 of	 achieving	 happiness,	 a	 desire	 and	 a
command	 to	 torment	 myself	 for	 some	 higher	 purpose.	 That	 you,
dearest,	 should	 be	 forced	 to	 land	 under	 the	wheels	 of	 this	 carriage,
which	 is	 destined	 for	me	alone,	 is	 really	 terrible.	 I	 am	consigned	 to
darkness	 by	my	 inner	 voice,	 yet	 in	 reality	 am	drawn	 to	 you;	 this	 is
irreconcilable;	yet	even	if	we	were	to	try,	 the	blows	would	fall	alike
on	you	and	me.
Dearest,	 I	certainly	don’t	want	you	to	be	other	 than	you	are;	after
all,	 it’s	 you	 I	 love	 and	 not	 a	 mirage.	 But	 then	 again	 there	 is	 that
tyranny	 which	 my	 very	 existence	 imposes	 upon	 you;	 this
contradiction	tears	me	apart.	It	also	proves	the	impossibility	of	it.
If	you	were	here	and	I	saw	your	suffering	(it	wouldn’t	be	just	that,
your	 suffering	 at	 a	 distance	 is	 worse),	 if	 I	 were	 able	 to	 help,	 if	 we
could	 get	 married	 at	 once,	 without	 thinking,	 I	 would	 of	 course	 let
everything	go,	I	would	even	let	misfortune	take	its	course.	But	this	is
not	 the	 way	 out	 at	 present.	 Considering	 your	 dear,	 suicidal	 letter
received	today,	I	could	almost	promise	to	let	everything	rest	the	way
it	 was	 in	 your	 sense,	 and	 to	 torment	 you	 no	 more.	 But	 how	many
times	have	I	promised	this!	I	cannot	vouch	for	myself.	With	your	next
letter,	or	perhaps	during	this	very	night,	 this	 fear	will	return,	I	can’t
escape	 it,	 it	 will	 be	 impossible	 to	 live	 through	 the	 period	 of	 our
engagement.	What	 hitherto	 has	 been	 repeated	 every	month,	will	 be
repeated	 every	 week.	 Every	 other	 letter	 will	 occasion	 frightening
associations	for	me,	and	that	terrible	humming	top	inside	me	will	start
spinning	again.	This	won’t	be	your	fault,	it	never	has	been,	Felice;	the
fault	 lies	 in	 the	general	 impossibility	of	 it.	For	example,	 I	 read	your
last	 letter.	It	 isn’t	possible	for	you	to	imagine	the	alarm	it	created	in
me.	The	considered	reflections	that	had	led	your	parents	to	give	their
consent	lay	before	me.	What	did	I	care	about	these	considerations?	I
detested	 these	 considerations.	 You	 wrote	 about	 your	 mother’s
potential	 love	 for	me!	What	 should	 I	do	with	her	 love?	 I	who	could
never	 return	 it,	 who	 never	 could	 or	would	wish	 to	 be	 equal	 to	 her
love!	 Even	 the	 extensive	 discussion	with	 your	 parents	 horrified	me.
Even	 the	 connection	 between	 engagement	 and	 holidays,	 and	 the



actual	 putting	 into	 words	 of	 this	 connection,	 terrified	 me.	 This	 is
madness,	I	see	it	clearly,	but	at	the	same	time	it	is	ineradicable,	that	I
know.
And	 yet	 these	 are	 merely	 indications	 of	 my	 true	 nature,	 which
would	 never	 stop	 undermining	 you.	 Do	 realize	 this,	 Felice;	 I	 am
prostrate	before	you	and	implore	you	to	push	me	aside;	anything	else
means	ruin	for	us	both.	This	is	the	word,	I	believe,	I	wrote	in	January;
again	it	is	bursting	forth;	it	cannot	be	suppressed.	If	I	could	rip	myself
open	before	you,	you	would	say	it	yourself.

Franz

September	2,	1913
I	 have	 calmed	 down,	 Felice;	 on	 Sunday	 I	 lay	 in	 the	 woods	 with	 a
headache	and	kept	turning	my	head	in	the	grass	with	the	pain;	today
it	is	better,	but	my	self-control	is	no	greater	than	it	was	before;	when
dealing	 with	 myself	 I	 am	 powerless.	 I	 can	 divide	 myself	 in	 my
thoughts;	 I	 can	 stand	 at	 your	 side,	 calm	 and	 contented,	 and	 while
doing	so	watch	my	utterly	pointless	self-torture;	in	my	thoughts	I	can
look	down	upon	us	 both,	 and	 at	 the	 sight	 of	 the	pain	 I	 inflict	 upon
you,	 the	 kindest	 of	 girls,	 I	 can	 pray	 for	 some	 exquisite	 torture	 for
myself;	this	I	can	do.	The	other	day	I	wrote	down	the	following	wish:
“When	 passing	 a	 house,	 to	 be	 pulled	 in	 through	 the	 ground-floor
window	by	a	rope	tied	around	one’s	neck	and	to	be	hauled	up,	bloody
and	 ragged,	 through	 all	 the	 ceilings,	 furniture,	 walls,	 and	 attics,
without	consideration,	as	 if	by	a	person	who	 is	paying	no	attention,
until	the	empty	noose,	dropping	the	last	shreds	of	me	when	breaking
through	the	roof	tiles,	appears	on	the	roof.”
But	in	reality	I	can	do	nothing,	am	entirely	shut	in	on	myself,	and
hear	your	beloved	voice	only	from	afar.	God	knows	from	what	source
these	 perpetual,	 steadily	 revolving	 worries	 feed!	 I	 cannot	 get	 the
better	of	them.	I	thought	(and	so	did	you)	that	I’d	grow	calmer	once	I
had	 written	 to	 your	 father.	 The	 opposite	 has	 happened;	 intensified
assault	greatly	intensifies	the	force	of	these	worries	and	anxieties.	This
is	the	law	by	which	all	weaklings	are	governed,	insisting	on	extreme
atonement	and	extreme	radical	measures.	The	desire	to	renounce	the
greatest	human	happiness	for	the	sake	of	writing	keeps	cutting	every
muscle	in	my	body.	I	am	unable	to	free	myself.	Everything	is	obscured
by	the	apprehensions	I	feel	at	the	idea	of	not	renouncing.



Dearest,	 everything	 you	 say	 to	me,	 I	 say	 almost	 all	 the	 time;	 the
slightest	 detachment	 from	 you	 makes	 me	 smart;	 whatever	 happens
between	 us	 is	 repeated	 with	 renewed	 intensity	 inside	 myself;	 faced
with	your	letters,	faced	by	your	pictures,	I	succumb.	And	yet—of	the
four	men	I	consider	to	be	my	true	blood-relations	(without	comparing
myself	 to	 them	 either	 in	 power	 or	 in	 range),	 Grillparzer,122
Dostoevski,	Kleist,123	and	Flaubert,	Dostoevski	was	the	only	one	to	get
married,	 and	 perhaps	 Kleist,	 when	 compelled	 by	 outer	 and	 inner
necessity	 to	shoot	himself	on	the	Wannsee,	was	 the	only	one	to	 find
the	right	solution.	All	this	might	be	entirely	irrelevant	as	far	as	we	are
concerned;	 after	 all,	 each	 one	 of	 us	 lives	 life	 anew—even	 if	 I	 were
standing	 in	 the	 very	 center	 of	 the	 shadow	 they	 cast	 upon	 our	 own
time.	But	 this	 is	a	 fundamental	question	of	 life	and	 faith	 in	general,
and	 from	 this	 point	 of	 view	 interpreting	 the	 behavior	 of	 these	 four
men	makes	more	sense.
But,	 dearest,	 none	 of	 this	 makes	 sense	 when	 held	 against	 the
torments	I	inflict	now,	and	which	are	undeniable,	whereas	I	can	only
anticipate	the	torment	that	the	future	holds	for	you.	You	are	so	sweet
and	kind;	if	I	were	once	to	kneel	before	you	I	don’t	think	I	could	ever
leave	 again.	 It	was	 angelic	 of	 you	 to	 ignore	what	 I	 said	 about	 your
letter	 concerning	 your	 parents.	 (Your	 telegram	 arrived	 this	 minute.
Dearest,	 don’t	 torment	 yourself!	 I	 didn’t	 get	 your	 letter	 until	 noon
today.	 As	 you	 know,	 postal	 deliveries	 to	 the	 apartment	 are	 very
unreliable.	And	it’s	now	5:30,	too	late	for	me	to	send	a	telegram.)
I	 don’t	 insist	 that	 you	 give	 that	 letter	 to	 your	 father.	 I	 wrote	 it
merely	 in	 my	 agitation,	 and	 just	 in	 case.	 The	 final	 decision	 rests
neither	with	your	father	nor	with	me,	but	only	with	you.	Perhaps	it	is
not	 for	 your	 father	 to	 make	 the	 decision;	 I	 am	 caught	 up	 in
contradictions	 and	 unable	 to	move,	 contradictions	 that	 have	 existed
from	the	very	beginning.
So	don’t	hand	that	letter	to	your	father	if	you	don’t	want	to,	but	I
can’t	write	 another	 letter	 now	 either,	my	hands	 are	 tied.	 Tell	 him	 I
disconcerted	you	about	something	that	had	to	be	cleared	up,	and	that
you	 don’t	 want	 me	 to	 write	 to	 him—both	 of	 which	 are	 true.	 You
couldn’t	 fail	 to	 have	 been	 disconcerted,	 and	 you	won’t	 allow	me	 to
write	the	way	I	should	have	to	write	if	I	wrote	now.	So	tell	him	that,
will	you?
Undoubtedly,	it	would	be	best	for	the	two	of	us	to	meet	in	Dresden
or	 in	 Berlin.	 In	 every	 way.	 Even	 if	 I	 don’t	 know	 what	 to	 say,	 and
merely	stand	there.	Not	that	this	would	do	me	much	good,	in	a	higher



sense,	considering	the	state	I	am	in	at	present,	but	this	is	immaterial.
However,	I	am	going	away	on	Saturday.	Have	I	told	you	about	the
International	Congress	for	First	Aid	and	Hygiene?	Yesterday	at	the	last
moment	 it	 was	 decided	 that	 I	 should	 go	 after	 all.124	 Which	 means
losing	 several	 days	 of	 my	 vacation,	 but	 it	 will	 have	 several
advantages.	 I	 am	 going	 to	 Vienna	 on	 Saturday,	 will	 probably	 stay
there	until	the	following	Saturday,	then	on	to	Riva	to	the	sanatorium,
where	I	will	stay,	and	then	for	the	last	few	days	I	may	take	a	short	trip
through	 northern	 Italy.	 If	 Riva	 isn’t	 warm	 enough	 I	 will	 simply	 go
further	south.
Devote	this	time,	Felice,	to	regaining	your	peace	of	mind;	and	when
you	have,	you	will	be	able	to	see	me	more	clearly.	Before	your	steady
gaze	I	spun	around	like	a	will-o’-the-wisp;	consider	whether	what	you
have	seen	only	in	haste	and	confusion	can	be	of	decisive	importance
in	 the	 long	run.	 I	am	ready	 to	 forego	all	 letters	 for	 the	sake	of	your
peace	of	mind;	during	 this	 time	write	only	 in	 case	of	 extreme	need.
And	I	won’t	write	to	you	properly,	either.	But	in	my	notebook	while
traveling	 I	will	 keep	noting	observations	 and	 comments,	will	 collect
them	and	send	them	to	you	two	or	three	times	a	week.	In	this	way	we
won’t	 be	 in	 intimate	 touch—so	 upsetting	 to	 you,	 for	which	 I	 am	 to
blame—and	yet	we	won’t	be	out	of	touch.
And	 on	my	 return	 we	 can	meet	 wherever	 you	 like;	 after	 all	 that
time	we	should	be	able	to	face	each	other	calmly	again.	If	you	were	to
agree	to	this!

Yours,	Franz

[PICTURE	POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Vienna,	September	7,	1913]

Best	wishes.	 Staying	Hotel	Matschakerhof	where	 Grillparzer	 used	 to
take	his	 lunch;	as	Laube,	his	biographer,	 said:	“Simple	but	good.”125
Nevertheless	I	shall	move	tomorrow,	hence	address	Main	Post	Office,
poste	restante.	Relentless	insomnia.

Franz

[PICTURE	POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Vienna,	September	9,	1913]

I	went	to	the	Zionist	Congress	this	morning.	I	have	no	real	contact.	I



feel	 it	 in	certain	respects,	also	for	the	entire	concept,	but	not	for	the
essential	part.——
So	far	not	even	a	moment	for	the	diary.

Franz

[LETTERHEAD:	H.	Mayreders	Hotel	Matschakerhof,	Vienna]
September	9,	1913

Impossible	 to	 keep	 a	 diary	 at	 the	 moment.	 Instead	 of	 thanking	 my
director	 for	 taking	me	along	 to	Vienna,	 I	wish	 I	had	begged	him	on
my	 knees	 not	 to	 take	 me.	 Insomnia,	 insomnia!	 First	 time	 in	 this
condition	while	traveling.	At	night	cold	compresses	around	my	head,
but	still	toss	about	in	vain,	wishing	I	were	lying	several	storeys	down
in	the	ground.	I	refuse	invitations	whenever	possible,	but	still	meet	a
tremendous	number	of	people	and	sit	at	meals	like	a	ghost.

Franz

[LETTERHEAD:	Chamber	of	Deputies]
[Vienna,]	9	P.M.,	September	13,	1913

I	am	not	proceeding	with	the	diary	about	Vienna.	It	would	be	best	if
the	days	 I	have	spent	 in	Vienna	could	be	obliterated—one	and	all.	 I
am	 leaving	 for	 Trieste	 tomorrow	morning	 at	 8:45,	 arriving	 there	 at
9:10	P.M.	On	Monday	 I	 am	 going	 on	 to	Venice.	 I	 am	 sleeping	 better
now,	but	inwardly	I	am	insecure	in	every	direction.	Moreover,	I	shall
now	be	traveling	alone	and	shall	be	able	to	see	whether	the	aversion
to	 my	 traveling	 companions	 was	 greater	 than	 my	 incapacity	 for
independent	action,	foreign	languages,	happy	coincidences.	I	got	your
telegram.	My	address	is	Venice,	poste	restante;	since	I	probably	won’t
be	staying	there	long,	I	will	arrange	for	everything	to	be	forwarded.

Franz

[Notes	about	the	time	of	September	6,	7	and	8,	1913,	on	four	pages	of	a
notebook,	written	on	both	sides.	UPPER	MARGIN	OF	FIRST	PAGE]	on	September	10,
1913

Between	 the	 pillars	 of	 the	 portico	 of	 the	 House	 of	 Parliament.126



Waiting	for	my	director.	Heavy	rain.	In	front	of	me	Athene	Parthenos
with	helmet	of	gold.
September	 6.	 Journey	 to	 Vienna.	 Inane	 literary	 gossip	 with	 Pick.
Considerable	 antipathy.	 Thus	 (like	 P.)	 one	 hangs	 on	 to	 the	 globe	 of
literature	 and	 cannot	 break	 away	 because	 one	 has	 dug	 in	 one’s
fingernails,	but	the	rest	of	oneself	is	free,	and	one’s	legs	keep	kicking
helplessly	 about.	 His	 nose-blowing	 tricks.	 He	 tyrannizes	 me	 by
maintaining	 that	 it	 is	 I	 who	 tyrannize	 him.—The	 observer	 in	 the
corner.—Heiligenstadt127	station,	deserted	with	deserted	trains.	In	the
distance	a	man	examining	the	timetable	posted	on	a	wall.	(I	am	now
sitting	 on	 the	 steps	 of	 a	 statue	 by	 one	 Theophil	 Hansen.)	 Bent,
wearing	 an	 overcoat,	 his	 face	 merging	 into	 the	 yellow	 timetable.
Passing	 a	 small	 terraced	 inn.	 A	 customer’s	 raised	 arm.	 Vienna.
Ridiculous	 uncertainties,	 all	 of	 which	 I	 finally	 respect.	 Hotel
Matschakerhof.	 2	 rooms	 with	 one	 entrance.	 Choose	 the	 front	 one.
Intolerable	noise.	Must	go	out	again	with	P.	Am	told	I	walk	too	fast,
walk	 even	 faster.	 Breezy	 air.	 Recognize	 everything	 I	 had	 forgotten.
Sleep	badly.	Full	of	worries.	A	horrible	dream.e	 (The	question	of	 the
diary	 is	 at	 the	 same	 time	 the	 question	 of	 the	 whole,	 contains	 all
impossibilities	 pertaining	 to	 the	 whole.	 Considered	 this	 in	 the	 train
during	my	conversation	with	P.	It	is	impossible	to	say	everything,	and
it	 is	 impossible	 not	 to	 say	 everything.	 Impossible	 to	 preserve	 one’s
freedom,	 impossible	 not	 to	 preserve	 it.	 Impossible	 to	 lead	 the	 only
possible	kind	of	 life,	 i.e.,	 to	 live	 together,	 each	one	 to	be	 free,	 each
one	 for	 himself,	 not	 to	 be	 married,	 neither	 outwardly	 nor	 actually,
simply	to	be	together	and	by	so	doing	to	have	taken	the	last	possible
step	beyond	the	friendship	between	men,	right	up	to	the	limit	set	for
myself	 where	 one	 foot	 is	 already	 raised.	 But	 after	 all,	 this	 too	 is
impossible.	 I	 thought	 of	 it	 as	 a	way	out,	 suddenly	 one	morning	 last
week;	 and	 meant	 to	 write	 it	 in	 the	 afternoon.	 That	 afternoon	 I
received	a	biography	of	Grillparzer.	He	did	it,	that	very	thing.	[At	this
moment	there	is	a	gentleman	examining	Theophil	Hansen,	I	am	sitting
there	like	his	Clio.]	But	what	an	intolerable,	wicked,	repulsive	life	 it
was,	and	yet	just	about	what	I	could	manage,	though	with	far	greater
suffering—since,	 in	certain	ways,	 I	am	much	weaker.	Returnf	 to	 this
later.)	Met	Lise	Weltsch128	this	evening.
September	7.	Antipathy	toward	P.	On	the	whole	a	very	decent	man.
Has	always	had	an	unpleasant	 little	gap	 in	his	character,	and	out	of
this	very	gap—now	that	one	is	constantly	on	hand	to	see—he	creeps
out	 in	 his	 entirety.	 Morning	 in	 Parliament.	 Before	 this,	 collected



tickets	 for	 Zionist	 Congress	 from	 Lise	 W.	 at	 the	 Residenz	 Café.	 To
Ehrenstein’s.129	 Ottakring.130	 Can’t	 make	 much	 of	 his	 poems.	 (Am
very	uneasy,	hence	also	a	little	insincere,	because	I’m	not	writing	this
for	myself	 alone.)	With	 both	 of	 them	 to	 the	 Thalisia.131	With	 them
and	 Lise	 W.	 in	 the	 Prater.132	 Pity	 and	 boredom.	 She	 is	 coming	 to
Berlin,	 to	 the	 Zionist	 office.	 Complains	 about	 her	 family’s
sentimentality,	yet	merely	wriggles	like	a	snake	that	has	been	pinned
down.	Nothing	 one	 can	 do	 for	 her.	 Sympathy	with	 this	 kind	 of	 girl
(via	myself	 in	 some	roundabout	way)	 is	perhaps	 the	 strongest	 social
sentiment	 I	 possess.	 Photographs,	 shooting	 gallery,	 “A-Day-in-the-
Jungle”	 merry-go-round	 (how	 helplessly	 she	 sits	 up	 there,	 her
billowing	dress	well	made,	atrociously	worn).	At	the	Prater	Café	with
her	father.	Gondola	pond.	Incessant	headaches.	The	W.’s	off	to	Monna
Vanna.133	Spend	10	hours	in	bed,	sleep	5.	Refuse	the	theater	ticket.
[September]	 8.	 Zionist	 Congress.	 Types	 with	 small	 round	 heads,
firm	cheeks.	The	workers’	delegate	from	Palestine,	permanent	uproar.
Herzl’s	daughter.	The	former	director	of	the	Gymnasium	in	Jaffa.	On
the	stairs,	erect,	scruffy	beard,	coat.	Fruitless	German	speeches,	much
Hebrew,	 most	 work	 done	 in	 small	 committees.	 Lise	 W.	 is	 merely
dragged	along	by	the	whole	thing	without	participating,	tosses	paper
balls	into	the	hall,	hopeless.	Frau	Thein.134

[PICTURE	POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Venice,	September	15,	1913]

Venice	 at	 last.	 But	 now	 I	 will	 have	 to	 throw	 myself	 into	 it
wholeheartedly,	 despite	 the	 pouring	 rain	 (the	more	 thoroughly	 will
my	days	 in	Vienna	be	washed	away)	and	the	 trembling	 in	my	head,
the	result	of	slight	seasickness	on	that	absurdly	short	crossing	[Trieste
—Venice],	but	in	a	gale.

Franz

[LETTERHEAD:	Hotel	Sandwirth,	Venice.	POSTMARK:	September	16,	1913]

Felice,	your	letter	is	neither	an	answer	to	my	last	 letters,	nor	is	 it	 in
accordance	with	our	agreement.	I	won’t	reproach	you	for	it;	after	all,
the	same	applies	to	my	letters.	We	had	meant	to	meet	somewhere	on



my	 return,	 in	 order,	 wretched	 as	 we	 are,	 to	 try	 and	 draw	 some
strength	from	each	other.	Do	you	still	not	realize,	Felice,	how	matters
stand	 with	 me?	 In	 the	 miserable	 state	 I	 am	 in,	 how	 can	 I	 possibly
write	 to	 your	 father?	 Imprisoned	 by	 inhibitions	with	which	 you	 are
familiar,	 I	am	unable	 to	move,	 I	am	utterly,	but	utterly	 incapable	of
suppressing	the	inner	obstacles;	the	only	thing	I	am	still	 just	capable
of	is	to	be	immensely	unhappy	about	it.	I	could	write	to	your	father	in
a	fashion	of	which	you	would	thoroughly	approve,	and	entirely	from
my	heart,	but	at	the	faintest	approach	to	the	faintest	reality,	I	would
inevitably	 be	 beside	 myself	 again,	 and	 quite	 ruthlessly,	 under	 an
irresistible	compulsion,	I	would	try	to	regain	my	independence.	That
could	 only	 lead	 to	 even	 deeper	 misery	 than	 we	 have	 so	 far
experienced,	Felice.	I	am	here	alone,	talk	to	hardly	a	soul	except	the
hotel	 staff,	 am	 overflowing	with	 unhappiness,	 and	 yet	 I	 think	 I	 feel
this	 condition	 to	 be	 appropriate	 to	myself,	 assigned	 to	me	 by	 some
superhuman	 justice,	a	condition	not	 to	be	 transgressed	but	borne	by
me	to	the	end	of	my	days.	What	hinders	me	is	not	having	to	“give	up
too	much	of	myself”—though,	in	a	limited	sense,	this	may	be	true—it
is	rather	that	I	am	prostrate,	like	an	animal	that	one	cannot	get	at	(not
even	 I)	 either	 by	 coaxing	 or	 by	 persuasion,	 although	 I	 cannot	 quite
resist	either,	least	of	all	the	latter.	But	I	am	unable	to	go	forward,	it	is
as	 though	 I	were	ensnared;	when	 I	 jerk	myself	 forward,	 I	am	 jerked
back	with	renewed	force.	That	is	the	one	clear	and	honest	statement
that	can	be	expected	of	me	at	the	moment.	While	gazing	at	the	clear
Venetian	sky	 from	my	bed	 this	morning	with	 these	 thoughts	passing
through	my	head,	I	was	ashamed	and	unhappy	enough.	But	what	am	I
to	do,	Felice?	We	shall	have	to	part.

Franz

[PICTURE	POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Verona,	September	20,	1913]

In	the	Church	of	Sant’	Anastasia	in	Verona,	where	I	am	sitting	wearily
in	a	pew.	Opposite	stands	a	life-size	marble	dwarf	who,	with	a	blissful
expression	 on	 his	 face,	 is	 supporting	 a	 holy-water	 basin.—I	 am
entirely	 cut	 off	 from	 all	 mail,	 won’t	 get	 any	 until	 the	 day	 after
tomorrow	 in	 Riva,	which	makes	me	 feel	 as	 though	 I	were	 on	 some
other	planet;	but	otherwise	I’m	here	in	all	my	misery.

F.



[POSTMARK:	Prague,	October	29,	1913]

Let	me	try,	not	only	for	you,	Felice,	but	also	for	myself	to	arrive	at	the
limits	of	possible	understanding.
When	I	wrote	 to	you	from	Venice	 I	didn’t	know	for	certain	that	 it
would	be	the	last	letter	of	what	had	been	until	then	an	uninterrupted
series.	 But	 when	 this	 turned	 out	 to	 be	 the	 case	 (the	 postcard	 from
Verona	 was	 not	 a	 postcard	 but	 a	 collapse),	 I	 thought	 it	 the	 wisest
thing	I	had	done	for	a	long	time.	It	was	made	easier	for	me	by	the	fact
that	I	heard	nothing	from	you.	The	last	communication	from	you	was
the	 telegram	 to	Venice	heralding	a	 letter	 that	never	 came.	 I	did	not
think	it	improbable	that	subsequently	you	had	written	to	Venice,	but
that	the	letter	never	reached	me;	for	the	Italian	post	office	clerk	flung
the	scrap	of	paper	on	which	he	had	got	me	to	write	my	Riva	address
into	a	corner	in	such	a	way	that	it	is	unlikely	ever	to	have	reappeared.
All	the	same,	I	did	not	write.	No,	I	did	write	once	more,	the	very	day
after	 the	 postcard	 from	 Verona;	 I	 was	 at	 Desenzano135	 at	 the	 time,
lying	 in	 the	 grass	 waiting	 for	 the	 steamer	 that	 was	 to	 take	 me	 to
Gardone,136	 and	 I	wrote	 to	 you.	 I	 didn’t	mail	 the	 letter,	 I	may	 still
have	it	somewhere,137	but	don’t	ask	to	see	it;	it	was	pieced	together,	I
even	 had	 to	 invent	 the	 conjunctions,	 it	 was	 frightful;	 that	 day	 at
Desenzano	I	had	really	come	to	the	end.
But	 by	 this	 time,	 Felice,	 you	 had	 received	my	 notes	 from	Vienna
and	 my	 letter	 from	 Venice,	 and	 you	 didn’t	 think	 it	 was	 the	 wisest
thing?	The	only	possible	thing?	That	I	simply	had	to	tear	myself	away,
unless	you	were	going	to	reject	me?	You	didn’t	think	so?	Don’t	think
so	 even	 now?	 But	 how	 can	 you	 combine	 these	 impossibilities:	 How
can	I	take	my	place	in	a	new	family,	and	then	establish	a	family	of	my
own,	I	who	am	rooted	so	loosely	into	my	own	family	that	I	feel	I	don’t
touch	anyone	on	any	side?	I	who	perhaps	can	share	the	pleasures	but
never	the	life	of	others,	no	matter	how	I	try?	I	who	wouldn’t	dare	to
be	continually	 truthful	 in	my	life	with	another,	yet	could	not	bear	a
life	 together	 without	 truth?	 As	 you	 see,	 I	 could	 not	 show	 you	 my
diary;	in	fact,	apart	from	the	pages	I	sent	you,	I	didn’t	write	another
word.	 For	 me,	 living	 together	 permanently	 without	 lies	 is	 as
impossible	as	 it	 is	without	 truth.	The	 first	glance	 I	 should	cast	upon
your	parents	would	be	a	lie.
But	this	is	not	all	that’s	going	on	inside	me.	My	longing	for	you	is
such	that	it	presses	on	my	breast	like	tears	that	cannot	be	wept.	(No



pains	 in	 the	 head,	 however,	 no	 palpitations;	 merely	 moderate,	 not
complete	insomnia—this	won’t	start	again	until	today.)	In	the	seminar
yesterday	 I	 stared	 at	 a	 girl138	 for	 an	 hour	 because	 she	 bore	 a	 faint
resemblance	 to	 you.	 For	 weeks	 past	 I	 have	 been	 making	 plans	 for
Christmas,	in	an	effort	to	scrape	together	the	sum	total	of	happiness	at
the	last	moment.	No,	whenever	I	come	up	against	reality	I	am	fated	to
be	struck	with	such	force	that	I	am	brought	to	my	senses.	But	if	you
were	 to	 ask	 me	 now	 what	 makes	 me	 tell	 you	 of	 these	 plans,	 so
contrary	to	my	convictions,	about	all	I	could	say	would	be:	“It	is	sheer
villainy.	 At	 a	 certain	 depth,	 though	 not	 at	 the	 deepest,	 there	 is
nothing	I	want	more	than	to	be	swept	toward	you;	and	the	fact	that	I
say	so	is	also	villainy.”
You,	Felice,	are	not	in	any	way	to	blame	for	the	despair	we	are	in,
the	 blame	 is	mine	 alone.	You	may	not	 even	be	 fully	 aware	 to	what
extent	 it	 is	 mine.	 If	 you	 think	 it	 over,	 your	 letters	 of	 the	 past	 few
months	 were	 essentially	 (omitting	 the	 pain)	 an	 expression	 of
amazement	 that	a	man	such	as	 I	could	possibly	exist.	You	could	not
believe	 it	 to	 be	 true.	 This	 you	 cannot	 deny.	 Were	 it	 not	 so,	 you
couldn’t	 have	 said	 that	 your	 mother’s	 love	 for	 you	 would	 be
transferred	 to	 me,	 you	 couldn’t	 have	 described	 your	 parents’
deliberations	 ending	 with	 the	 sentence:	 “so	 it	 remains	 only	 a	 love-
match”;	 you	 couldn’t	 have	 associated	 our	 engagement	 with	 the
holidays.	And	yet	that’s	how	I	am,	you	must	believe	it.

Franz

*[“UNUSUALLY	PALE”	CROSSED	OUT.	BETWEEN	THE	LINES]	This	is	just	coquetry,	I	look	exactly	as	I
always	do	and	as	I	did	last	August.
†[IN	THE	MARGIN]	Here	it	is	after	all,	the	remark:	Didn’t	you	wake	up	in	a	cold	sweat?
‡	[IN	A	FRAME]	12:30	at	night.
§[BETWEEN	THE	LINES]	(My	reply	in	parentheses:	Because	there	was	no	news	today.)
‖[IN	THE	LOWER	MARGIN]	not	alleys,	but	streets77

a[BETWEEN	THE	LINES]	After	the	letter	you	received	on	Thursday,	it	would	only	stand	to	reason.
What	else	can	I	expect?
b[BETWEEN	 THE	 LINES]	NO,	 your	 express	 letter	 has	 just	 arrived.	Dearest,	 to	 you	who	did	 not
understand,	nor	could	have	understood	that	letter,	my	fears	must	seem	idiotic;	but	they	are
horribly	well-founded	fears.
cThursday	[CROSSED	OUT].



d[BETWEEN	THE	LINES]	had	I	slept	as	much	as	I	thought	about	you,	it	would	have	been	a	lot
e[ADDED	BELOW	“DREAM”]	(Malek)
f[ADDED	ABOVE	“RETURN”]	dream



	
Grete	Bloch.	The	following	is	the	first	letter	in	this	correspondence
to	 be	 addressed	 to	 her.	 She	was	 born	 in	Berlin	 on	March	 21,	 1892,
and	 went	 to	 school	 there,	 then	 graduated	 from	 the	 Commercial
Academy,	 which	 completed	 her	 education.	 From	 1908	 to	 1915	 she
worked	 as	 a	 shorthand-typist	 in	 Berlin,	 Frankfurt	 am	 Main,	 and
Vienna.	 From	 1915	 she	 worked	 first	 as	 secretary,	 subsequently	 as
executive	 secretary,	with	 a	 Berlin	 firm	making	 office	machines.	 She
had	 one	 brother,	 Hans	 Bloch,	 a	 year	 older	 than	 herself.	 He	 is
mentioned	several	times	in	the	following	correspondence.
Grete	 Bloch	 and	 Felice	 Bauer	 met	 probably	 in	 April	 1913.	 Their
friendship	 lasted	 a	 great	 deal	 longer	 than	 their	 relationship	 with
Kafka.	 As	 late	 as	 1935	 Grete	 Bloch,	 as	 a	 refugee	 on	 her	 way	 to
Palestine	and	finally	to	Italy,	visited	her	friend	who	at	that	time	was
living	with	her	family	in	Geneva.	It	was	then	that	she	handed	over	to
Felice	some	of	the	letters	she	had	received	from	Kafka.
Kafka	met	Grete	Bloch	for	the	first	time	at	the	end	of	October	1913
when,	 at	 Felice’s	 request,	 she	 went	 to	 see	 him	 in	 Prague	 to	 act	 as
intermediary	 between	 them.	 This	 meeting	 started	 a	 correspondence
which	lasted	a	year.	The	following	represents	all	that	has	survived.	In
the	third	revised	edition	of	his	biography	of	Kafka	(English	edition,	p.
241),	Max	Brod	published	part	of	a	letter	from	Grete	Bloch	to	a	friend
in	Palestine;	this	was	written	on	April	21,	1940,	from	Florence,	where
she	 was	 then	 living.	 In	 it	 she	 says	 that	 years	 ago	 she	 had	 had	 an
illegitimate	 child,	 a	 son	 who	 “when	 nearly	 seven	 years	 old	 died
suddenly	 in	Munich	 in	1921.”	 If	 this	 is	 correct,	 the	 child	must	have
been	born	about	1914.	Although	the	father’s	name	is	not	mentioned	in
the	letter,	it	was	clear	to	the	recipient,	Max	Brod’s	sole	informant	on
the	subject,	that	she	attributed	the	paternity	to	Kafka.
Neither	the	content	nor	the	tone	of	the	following	letters	from	Kafka
to	Grete	Bloch,	dating	 from	October	29,	1913,	 to	October	15,	1914,
suggests	 that	 the	 relationship	 between	 them	 was	 such	 that	 a	 child
born	 in	 1914	 or	 early	 1915	 would	 have	 been	 his,	 or	 indeed	 that
during	this	time	she	had	a	child	at	all.	Moreover,	exile	friends	of	Grete
Bloch’s	 in	Florence,	 to	whom	she	 told	 the	 story	 for	 the	 first	 time	at
about	 the	 date	 of	 her	 letter	 to	 Palestine,	 received	 it	 even	 then	with
incredulity.	Also,	the	fact	that	Kafka	went	on	a	trip	on	May	24,	1915,
to	the	countryside	near	Dresden	(the	“Sächsische	Schweiz”)	with	both
Felice	 Bauer	 and	 Grete	 Bloch	 (a	 postcard	 of	 that	 date	 addressed	 to



Kafka’s	sister	Ottla	and	signed	by	the	three	of	them	was	in	the	editors’
hands)	makes	it	seem	very	doubtful	that	the	engaged	couple’s	 friend
had	only	recently	had,	or	was	about	to	have,	a	child	by	Kafka.	In	the
middle	of	1916,	at	a	time	when	neither	the	1940	letter	from	Florence
nor	 any	 other	 correspondence	 points	 to	 an	 intimate	 relationship
between	Kafka	and	Grete	Bloch,	Felice	must	have	told	him	that	Grete
Bloch	found	herself	in	difficulties.	A	remark	in	the	margin	of	Kafka’s
letter	to	Felice	of	August	31,	1916,	reads:	“How	does	Frl.	Bloch	bear
it,	and	what	does	 it	mean	to	her?”	And	in	his	 letter	of	September	1,
1916,	he	writes:	“I	am	deeply	disturbed	by	Fräulein	Grete’s	suffering;	I
am	sure	you	won’t	desert	her	now	as,	 inconceivably,	you	have	done
sometimes	in	the	past.…	By	being	kind	to	her,	you	are	acting	on	my
behalf	as	well.”
The	guess	 that	Grete	Bloch’s	 suffering	at	 that	 time	was	due	 to	her

being	pregnant	is,	of	course,	justified	only	in	connection	with	her	later
Florence	 statements.	 But	 quite	 apart	 from	 the	 discrepancy	 of	 the
dates,	 it	 is	 highly	 unlikely	 that	 Kafka,	 as	 the	 possible	 father	 of	 the
child,	 should	 have	 mentioned	 the	 unmarried	 mother’s	 situation	 so
casually.
According	to	the	British	Red	Cross,	Grete	Bloch,	together	with	other

Jews,	 was	 arrested	 after	 Hitler’s	 occupation	 of	 Italy.	 She	 died
presumably	in	a	concentration	camp.

To	Grete	Bloch
[LETTERHEAD:	Workers’	Accident	Insurance	Institute]

October	29,	1913
Dear	Fräulein	Bloch,
Thank	you	for	your	invitation,	of	course	I	shall	come,	name	a	time

that	suits	you	and	leave	a	message	for	me	with	the	porter	which	I	will
collect	sometime	tomorrow.
One	thing,	however,	I	mustn’t	keep	from	you	even	now:	there	were

times	when	I	should	have	been	happy	to	meet	you;	but	I	now	realize
that	no	discussion	has	ever	helped	me	to	clarify	matters;	if	anything,
it	has	confused	me.	And	as	 I	am	sure	you	realize,	 there	 is	confusion
enough	within	me.

Yours	respectfully,	Dr.	F.	Kafka



November	6,	1913
Well,	 I’ll	 be	 coming	 on	 Saturday,	 Felice,	 leaving	 here	 at	 3	 P.M.,	 and
will	have	to	leave	Berlin	on	Sunday	between	4	and	5.	I	will	be	staying
at	the	Askanische	Hof.
I	do	realize	that	it	is	absolutely	essential	for	us	to	meet.	Originally,	I

had	not	meant	to	come	until	Christmas,	but	when	your	letter	and	your
girl	friend	[Grete	Bloch]	arrived	I	decided	to	come	this	Saturday;	and
then,	when	your	friend	left	and	I	had	no	letter	 from	you,	and	minor
obstacles	 arose,	 I	 intended	 to	 postpone	my	 journey	 until	 two	weeks
from	Saturday	 (Max	 is	 going	 to	Berlin	 a	week	 from	Saturday,	 and	 I
wanted	to	go	alone).	But	owing	to	the	discoveries	I	have	made	about
myself	 during	 this	 past	 week—I	 feel	 utterly	 futile—and	 now	 that	 I
have	 your	 letter,	 I	 am	 coming	 on	 Saturday.	 Should	 something
suddenly	prevent	me,	I’ll	send	a	telegram.
Have	you	any	real	hope,	Felice,	that	our	meeting	will	make	things

clear	 to	 us?	 I	 agree	 that	 it	 is	 absolutely	 essential,	 but	will	 it	 in	 fact
make	things	clear?	No	matter	where	I	am,	things	are	not	clear.	Don’t
you	 remember	 that	 after	 each	meeting	 you	 have	 felt	more	 doubtful
than	ever?	That	it	was	only	in	letters	that	all	doubts	were	resolved,	in
letters	comprising	the	better	part	of	my	self?
Well,	we’ll	see,	and	let	heaven	look	upon	us	with	understanding.

Franz

I	found	the	two	slips	of	paper	from	Desenzano,	they	are	enclosed.
Do	 you	 know	 that	 since	 last	winter	 I	 have	 not	written	 a	 single
line	that	can	be	allowed	to	survive?

The	two	enclosed	slips	of	paper:
Desenzano,	on	Lake	Garda,	Sunday	[September	21,	1913]	in	the	grass,
in	 front	 of	me	 the	 ripples	 in	 the	 reeds;	my	 view	 is	 bordered	 by	 the
peninsula	of	Sirmione	on	the	right,	on	the	left	by	the	banks	of	the	lake
as	 far	 as	Manerba;	 sunny,	 nearby	 two	workmen	 have	 just	 stretched
out	in	the	grass.
The	 fact	 that	 no	 one	 knows	where	 I	 am	 is	my	 only	 happiness.	 If

only	 I	 could	 prolong	 this	 forever!	 It	 would	 be	 far	 more	 just	 than
death.	I	am	empty	and	futile	in	every	corner	of	my	being,	even	in	my
unhappiness.	 Now	 for	 an	 island,	 with	 nobody	 on	 it,	 instead	 of	 the
sanatorium.139



These	 complaints,	 however,	 do	 not	 relieve	 me;	 I	 remain	 entirely
unmoved,	 am	 like	 a	 great	 stone	 at	 the	 very	 center	 of	 which	 there
flickers	a	tiny	soul.	Today	I	dreamt	about	you	and	your	father,	I	might
be	able	to	remember	the	details,	but	don’t	want	to	think	about	it.	One
thing	 I	 know—that	 as	 I	 reached	 the	 door	 I	 answered	 him:	 “But
perhaps	it	is	only	that	I	am	ill.”
I	 don’t	 keep	 a	 diary	 at	 all,	 I	 wouldn’t	 know	 what	 for;	 nothing

happens	to	me	to	stir	my	inmost	self.	This	applies	even	if	I	weep,	as	I
did	yesterday	in	a	cinematographic	theater	in	Verona.	I	am	capable	of
enjoying	human	relationships,	but	not	experiencing	 them.	This	 I	can
verify	 again	 and	 again:	 yesterday	 at	 a	 fiesta	 in	 Verona,	 before	 that
with	the	honeymoon	couples	in	Venice.

To	Grete	Bloch
November	10,	1913

Dear	Fräulein	Bloch,
I	returned	from	Berlin	last	night,	I	am	writing	to	you	before	writing

to	F.	This	trip	was	largely	your	doing,	and	you	were	responsible;	I	can
thank	you	only	by	telling	you	about	it.
But	 first	 I	 should	 like	 to	 confess	 something,	 not	 because	 this

confession	 gives	 me	 pleasure,	 but	 because	 it	 would	 be	 pointless	 to
write	without	complete	honesty,	or	as	near	as	one	can	get	to	it.
When	I	got	your	letter	from	Aussig	I	looked	forward	to	meeting	you,

though	I	was	disconcerted	by	a	surprise	letter	from	F.	that	arrived	at
the	 same	 time.	 In	 any	 case	 it	 means	 that	 my	 first	 letter	 was	 not
entirely	 honest.	 I	 was	 expecting	 to	 meet	 (after	 all,	 I	 knew	 nothing
about	 you	 except	 that	 you	 were	 efficient)	 an	 elderly	 spinster	 with
maternal	feelings	who,	moreover—I	don’t	quite	know	why—would	be
tall	and	strong.	To	this	kind	of	girl,	I	thought,	one	might	really	be	able
to	confess	everything,	which	in	itself	would	be	a	blessing,	and	perhaps
one	might	get	some	good	advice	(the	belief	that	an	adult	is	capable	of
receiving	 good	 advice	 is	 one	 of	 my	 greatest	 stupidities),	 and	 if	 not
advice,	then	perhaps	comfort,	and	if	not	comfort,	then	at	least	news	of
F.	But	 then	you	arrived	and	were	a	slim,	young,	undoubtedly	rather
unusual	girl.	I	had	spent	2	hours	at	home	carefully	preparing	all	I	had
to	say	on	the	main	issue,	but	when	it	came	to	talking—apart	from	the
fact	that	I	am	quite	incapable	of	talking—all	I	managed	to	utter	were
some	miserable	 fragments	which	partly	you	 ignored,	 and	partly	 and



justifiably	considered	 irrelevant.	Yet	even	during	 that	 conversation	 I
had	the	feeling	of	having	said	too	much,	and	this	feeling	increased	to
such	an	extent	on	my	way	home	and	at	home	 that	 I	was	 filled	with
rage	 and	 despair	 at	 myself.	 I	 imagined	 that	 in	 addition	 to	 having
wronged	F.	so	deeply	already,	I	had	betrayed	her	as	well.	I	told	myself
that	you	couldn’t	be	her	 intimate	 friend;	and	 that,	preoccupied	with
my	prepared	confession,	I	had	not	adequately	tested	you.	How	could
you	 possibly	 be	 a	 close	 friend	 of	 F.?	 From	 her	 letters	 I	 had	 heard
practically	 nothing	 about	 you;	 and	 you	 yourself	 had	 said	 that	 you
have	known	her	only	nine	months;	 later	 it	 turned	out	 to	be	only	six
months.	 At	 first	 you	 looked	 for	 the	 cause	 of	 our	 unhappiness	 in
entirely	the	wrong	place;	then	you	went	on	to	tell	me	in	great	detail
about	 the	 trouble	 F.	 has	 with	 her	 teeth,	 and	 to	 me	 tooth	 trouble
(something	you	couldn’t	have	known,	but	 I	didn’t	bother	 to	 tell	you
that	 night)	 is	 among	 the	 most	 repulsive	 ailments,	 which	 I	 can
overlook	only	in	people	most	dear	to	me,	and	then	only	just;	you	told
me	 about	 the	 breaking-off	 of	 F.’s	 brother’s	 engagement,	 thereby
bringing	the	entire	family,	who	frighten	me	in	every	way	and	whom	I
would	prefer	 to	 forget,	most	vividly	 to	 life—in	 short,	 I	was	a	 fool,	 I
completely	 misinterpreted	 everything	 and	 decided—my	 foolishness
was	at	least	logical—not	to	come	again	the	following	evening,	and	to
announce	it	in	a	letter	in	which——	it’s	late	again,	I	won’t	be	able	to
finish	today	and	mail	the	letter	in	the	morning,	and	you	may	be	angry
with	me	for	not	having	answered	your	letter,	the	obvious	kindness	of
which	is	broken	only	by	the	unintelligible	passage	about	the	roses	(be
sorry	for?	What	do	you	mean	by	that?	Actually,	it’s	true	in	one	sense,
I	 am	 sorry	 for	 all	 girls,	 it’s	 the	only	 incontestable	 social	 sentiment	 I
possess.	Where	this	compassion	springs	from,	I	am	still	not	quite	clear.
Perhaps	 I	 am	 sorry	 for	 girls	 on	 account	 of	 the	 transformation	 into
women	 which	 they	 have	 to	 undergo.	 In	 that	 case,	 however,	 my
compassion—if	that’s	what	it	is—would	be	a	very	girlish	sentiment).

In	my	letter—I	continue	with	my	confession—I	meant	to	explain	that
everything	 I	 said	 that	evening	was	wrong,	merely	 idle	words	due	 to
my	 clumsiness	 and	 its	 closely	 related	dishonesty,	 that	 it	 had	merely
confused	your	original	 correct	opinion	and	 if	 it	were	 to	be	 repeated
the	following	evening	(which	would	definitely	be	the	case)	would	be
bound	 to	 confuse	 it	 further.	For	 this	 reason	 I	definitely	had	 to	deny
myself	the	meeting.



I	had	already	started	the	letter,	perhaps	even	written	the	first	lines,
but	 abandoned	 it	 and	 went	 to	 see	 you.	Whatever	 the	 consequences
may	have	been	or	will	be,	it	is	certain	that	for	one	night	and	one	day	I
did	you	a	hideous	and	above	all	unnecessary	injustice.
And	 now	 I	 shall	 tell	 you	 about	 Berlin.	 My	 serious	 decisions	 are

serious	only	 insofar	as	 I	am	 tremendously	 tormented	 if	 I	don’t	 carry
them	 out.	 On	 the	 other	 hand,	 it	 so	 happens	 that	 very	 often	 I	 don’t
carry	them	out.	I	don’t	think	I	would	have	gone	on	Saturday	but	for	a
letter	from	F.	in	which	I	was	reminded	of	the	promise	I	had	made	to
you.	But	then	I	went,	and	gladly.
And	then	something	happened	which	invariably	happens	whenever

I	 go	 to	 Berlin	 and	 which,	 intentionally	 or	 unintentionally,	 I	 forget
prior	 to	 every	 departure.	 I	must	 preface	 this	 by	 saying	 that	 I	 really
know	F.	 as	4	almost	 incompatible	girls,	 each	almost	 equally	dear	 to
me.	The	first	is	the	one	who	was	in	Prague,	the	second	is	the	one	who
writes	 letters	 to	me	 (in	 herself	 she	 is	 manifold,	 yet	 consistent),	 the
third	is	the	one	I	meet	in	Berlin,	and	the	fourth	the	one	who	consorts
with	people	unknown	to	me,	and	of	her	I	hear	in	letters	or	from	her
own	accounts.	Well,	 the	 third	has	no	great	 liking	 for	me.	Nothing	 is
more	 natural,	 I	 regard	 it	 as	 the	most	 natural	 thing.	 I	 tell	myself	 as
much,	and	with	horror,	every	time	I	 leave	Berlin;	but	this	 time	with
the	additional	feeling	of	how	well	deserved	it	is.	It	is	F.’s	good	angel
who	leads	her,	who	leads	her	so	very	close,	and	perhaps	not	even	very
close,	past	me.
I	 meant	 to	 write	 more	 about	 this;	 I	 am	 afraid	 I’m	 going	 off	 at	 a

tangent,	 the	 time	 has	 come	 to	 tell	 you	 briefly	 what	 happened.	 On
Friday	F.	got	my	 letter	announcing	my	arrival	on	Saturday	at	10:30
P.M.	I	didn’t	receive	any	confirmation.	I	was	afraid	my	letter	might	not
have	arrived,	wanted	to	send	a	telegram,	but	finally	hoped	I	might	at
least	find	a	word	of	greeting	at	the	hotel	that	evening.	Had	I	not	even
the	right	to	hope	to	see	her	at	the	station?	Remember,	I	had	to	leave
again	on	Sunday	at	4:30,	and	even	if	I	intended	to	stay	till	midnight,
travel	all	night,	and	hurry	straight	from	the	train	to	my	office,	my	stay
would	 still	 be	 one	 of	 lamentably	 few	 hours.	 But	 no	 one	was	 at	 the
station,	and	there	was	nothing	at	the	hotel.	So	my	letter	had	certainly
gone	 astray,	 and	 that	was	 very	 bad.	 Nevertheless,	 in	 the	morning	 I
waited	 until	 8:30,	 and	 since	 it	 was	 impossible	 to	wait	 any	 longer	 I
sent	 a	 messenger	 on	 a	 bicycle.	 He	 came	 back	 at	 9	 with	 a	 letter	 in
which	F.	wrote	to	say	she	would	telephone	me	in	a	quarter	of	an	hour;



she	 telephoned	 at	 about	 10	 o’clock.	 You	 realize	 that	 none	 of	 these
observations	would	be	worth	mentioning	but	 for	what	 followed.	We
went	for	a	walk	in	the	Tiergarten.	I	am	telling	you	only	those	things
that	support	my	argument.	F.	had	to	go	to	a	funeral	that	was	to	take
place	 at	 12,	we	 tore	 along	and	arrived	on	 time;	 the	 last	 I	 saw	of	 F.
through	 the	 automobile	 window	 was	 her	 passing	 through	 the
cemetery	gate	with	 two	male	acquaintances	and	disappearing	 in	 the
crowd.	Why	 I	was	 such	 a	 fool	 as	 not	 to	 join	 her	 occurs	 to	me	 only
now.	She	suggested	that	she	would	telephone	me	at	3	and	come	to	the
station,	but	that	I	should	leave	at	4:30	since	she	couldn’t	promise	to
be	free	 in	the	evening;	at	any	rate,	at	6	she	had	to	go	to	the	station
with	her	brother	who	was	leaving	for	Brussels	(incidentally,	I	was	not
told	 about	 the	 breaking-off	 of	 the	 engagement).	 I	 lunched,	 then
hurried	to	my	hotel	intending	to	wait	for	the	telephone	call;	but	it	was
only	 1	 o’clock,	 the	 rain	 came	 down	 slowly	 but	 incessantly;	 I	 was
somewhat	depressed	and	drove	to	Schöneberg	to	see	a	good	friend140
because	 I	 found	sitting	 in	 the	hotel	 really	unbearable.	At	2:45	 I	 tore
myself	 away	 from	 my	 friend,	 as	 I	 wanted	 to	 avoid	 the	 disaster	 of
missing	 the	 call.	 Arriving	 punctually	 at	 3,	 I	 found	 I	 had	 missed
nothing,	there	had	been	no	call	for	me.	And	now	the	waiting	began.	I
sat	in	the	hotel	lobby	and	gazed	at	the	rain,	I	went	upstairs	and	flung
my	few	things	into	my	bag,	I	went	down	again	and	sat	in	a	chair	and
the	clock	moved	on	until	it	was	actually	past	4	and	I	had	to	go	to	the
station.	F.,	of	course,	might	still	be	at	the	station,	but	that	would	have
been	 a	 miracle,	 and	 indeed	 it	 didn’t	 happen.	 The	 rain	 might	 have
prevented	 her	 from	 coming	 to	 the	 station,	 but	 no	 one	 could	 have
prevented	her	from	telephoning.	So	I	left	Berlin	like	one	who	had	had
no	right	to	go	there.	And	in	a	sense	this	is	true.
But	my	words	are	becoming	distorted,	I	am	unable	to	write;	when

we	 met	 for	 the	 first	 time	 I	 was	 in	 such	 a	 wretched	 state	 that	 if	 it
weren’t	 for	 your	 immense	 vitality	 I	 wouldn’t	 be	 able	 to	 understand
how,	 after	 that	 kind	 of	 meeting,	 you	 could	 bear	 to	 be	 near	me	 for
more	than	2	minutes.	What	is	more,	I	cannot	even	judge	whether	this
letter	expresses	base	or	decent	sentiments,	though	needless	to	say	I	am
much	more	inclined	to	feel	and	believe	the	former.	But	enough	of	this,
it’s	nearly	midnight.

Yours,	Franz	K.

To	Grete	Bloch



[November	18,	1913]
Dear	 Fräulein	 Bloch,	 now	 I	 am	 robbing	 you	 of	 your	 nights,	 am
conscious	of	your	sympathy	which	exceeds	both	my	imagination	and
my	faculties,	bask	in	it	for	days	on	end,	yet	fail	to	answer.	I	couldn’t.
Please	understand	me,	this	is	not	an	excuse.	Perhaps	you	didn’t	expect
a	 reply	 from	me,	 but	 I	 expected	 it;	 the	 moment	 I	 got	 your	 letter	 I
wanted	so	much	to	say	or	do	something	that	would	be	equivalent	to
kissing	your	hand,	but	I	couldn’t,	nor	can	I	today;	if	it	doesn’t	happen
at	the	right	time	I	cannot	strike	a	true	word	out	of	myself.	By	the	way,
I	haven’t	written	once	to	F.	since	my	visit,	nor	have	I	heard	from	her.
Isn’t	the	latter	rather	strange?
But	 I	 won’t	 go	 on.	 My	 behavior	 could	 never	 be	 as	 infamous	 in

reality	 as	 it	 is	 in	my	 letter.	 I	 am	 getting	 downright	 exhausted	 and,
though	my	mind	is	clear	and	my	body	at	peace,	I	can’t	go	on	writing.
My	idea	of	the	person	to	whom	I	am	writing	is	fading	away,	and	I	feel
as	though	I	am	in	a	fog.
I	shall	continue	tomorrow	and	not	start	afresh,	for	a	few	days	ago	I

destroyed	 two	almost	equally	 self-confident	opening	paragraphs.	But
you	must	tell	me	explicitly	that	you	don’t	mind	my	not	answering	at
once,	and	that	you	don’t	even	mind	if	my	answer	consists	of	nothing
but	a	report	of	a	state	of	mind	hardly	worth	reporting.

Before	going	to	bed,	however,	I	shall	record	a	dream	I	had	last	night
to	 show	 you	 that	 at	 night	 I	 am	 somewhat	 more	 active	 than	 when
awake.	Listen:	on	a	rising	road,	starting	at	the	left	as	seen	from	below,
about	 halfway	 up	 and	 mostly	 in	 the	 roadway,	 there	 lay	 a	 pile	 of
rubbish	or	solidly	packed	clay	which	had	crumbled	 lower	and	 lower
on	the	right,	while	on	the	left	it	rose	as	high	as	the	palings	of	a	fence.
When	skirting	it	on	the	right	where	the	road	was	almost	clear,	I	saw	a
man	 on	 a	 tricycle	 coming	 toward	 me	 from	 below	 and	 apparently
making	straight	for	the	obstacle.	He	was	a	man	who	seemed	to	have
no	eyes,	at	least	his	eyes	looked	like	holes	that	had	been	effaced.	The
tricycle	 was	 rickety,	 so	 that	 it	 progressed	 in	 a	 shaky,	 uncertain
fashion,	nevertheless	 silently,	with	almost	exaggerated	quietness	and
ease.	At	the	last	moment	I	seized	hold	of	the	man,	held	him	as	though
he	were	the	handlebars	of	his	vehicle,	and	steered	the	latter	into	the
gap	through	which	I	had	come.	Whereupon	the	man	slumped	against
me;	I	was	as	tall	as	a	giant	and	in	order	to	hold	him	I	had	to	stand	in
an	 awkward	 position;	 the	 vehicle,	 moreover,	 as	 though	 riderless,



began	 to	 run	 backwards,	 and	 though	 slowly,	 it	 dragged	me	 after	 it.
We	passed	 a	 farm	cart	 on	which	 stood	a	number	of	 people	huddled
together,	 all	 somberly	 dressed,	 among	 them	 a	 boy	 scout	 wearing	 a
light	 gray	 hat	 with	 a	 turned-up	 brim.	 From	 this	 boy,	 whom	 I	 had
recognized	 from	 some	 way	 off,	 I	 expected	 help,	 but	 he	 turned	 and
squeezed	himself	 in	among	 the	people.	Then	 from	behind	 the	cart—
the	tricycle	meanwhile	kept	rolling	on	and	I,	bent	double	and	with	my
legs	 astraddle,	 had	 to	 follow—there	 came	 toward	me	 someone	who
brought	me	help,	but	who	he	was	I	can	no	longer	remember.——
This	is	how	I	help	men	on	tricycles	at	night.

First	of	all,	dear	Fräulein	Bloch,	there	are	two	errors	in	your	letter.	I
didn’t	 feign	 interest	when	you	 told	me	about	F.’s	 toothache	and	 the
breaking-off	 of	 her	 brother’s	 engagement.	 Indeed,	 I	 was	 extremely
interested,	there	was	nothing	I	would	rather	have	listened	to;	for	my
liking,	you	told	me	far	too	little	about	it;	that’s	how	I	am,	and	surely
that’s	 not	 particularly	 remarkable;	 the	 abscess	 under	 the	bridge,	 the
piecemeal	breaking-off	of	 the	bridge,	 I	 should	 like	 to	have	heard	all
about	 that	 with	 every	 detail	 and	 even	 asked	 F.	 about	 it	 in	 Berlin.
Don’t	you	get	pleasure	out	of	exaggerating	painful	things	as	much	as
possible?	For	people	with	weak	instincts	it	often	seems	to	me	the	only
way	 to	 drive	 out	 pain;	 like	 medicine,	 which	 is	 devoid	 of	 all	 good
instincts,	 it	 cauterizes	 the	 sore	 spot.	By	 so	doing,	of	 course,	nothing
definite	 is	achieved,	but	 the	moment	 itself—and	 those	with	bad	and
weak	instincts	haven’t	time	to	worry	about	more	than	that—is	almost
pleasurable.	 Besides,	 other	 things	 may	 have	 contributed,	 anyway	 I
wasn’t	 feigning;	 on	 the	 contrary,	 I	 was	 particularly	 truthful	 on	 this
occasion.
The	 second	 error	 concerns	 F.’s	 letters;	 not	 that	 you	 were

misinformed	about	them.	The	last	6	months	have	in	fact	been	spent	in
complaints	on	my	part	about	 the	delay	and	deficiency	of	her	 letters,
and	 not	 getting	 an	 adequate	 explanation,	 above	 all	 not	 getting	 an
adequate	explanation	 for	 the	difference	 between	 them	and	 those	 of	 the
first	months.	In	my	inability	to	tolerate	such	a	situation	I	feel	like	you,
and	no	doubt	I	have	written	a	pile	of	letters	on	the	subject	that	verge
on	madness.	And	the	worst	of	it	is	that	again	letters	follow	from	both
sides	 dealing	 exclusively	 with	 the	 writing	 of	 letters—empty,	 time-
wasting	letters,	secretly	no	more	than	accounts	of	the	torture	it	is,	or
rather	can	be,	to	carry	on	a	correspondence.	Essentially,	however,	it’s



not	 letters	 one	 wants,	 merely	 two	 words,	 not	 much	 more.	 One’s
craving	 for	 these	 letters,	 after	 all,	 is	 nothing	 but	 fear	 and
apprehension.—So	in	this	respect	you	were	right;	but	there	were	new
fears	 and	apprehensions,	 and	with	me	 these	 are	 always	 so	 exclusive
that	I	not	only	forget	the	old	ones,	but,	even	when	reminded	of	them,
can	no	longer	imagine	them.
Well,	I	shall	now	send	you	my	kindest	regards	and	mail	this	letter,
however	 uncertain	 and	 confused	 it	 may	 be.	 Incidentally,	 this
uncertainty,	 as	 you	 will	 realize,	 springs	 from	 a	 single	 source:	 that
practically	every	word	I	put	on	paper—not	merely	those	addressed	to
you—I	promptly	want	to	retract,	or	better	still,	obliterate.

Yours,	F.	Kafka

You	 tell	 me	 your	 activities	 in	 Vienna	 are	 successful.	 What	 do
these	 successes	 consist	 of?	 Does	 it	 mean	 you	 have	 got	 used	 to
Vienna?	Have	you	a	pleasant	room?	I	ask	because	I	myself	have
just	moved141	and	notice	once	again	how	I	 instantly	get	used	to
new	rooms,	which	merely	proves	that	I	had	no	feeling	for	the	old
ones,	however	much	 I	always	 think	 I	have.	 I	 also	have	a	 lovely
view	 which,	 if	 your	 memory	 is	 equal	 to	 your	 good	 sense	 of
topography,	 you	may	 roughly	 be	 able	 to	 imagine.	 Immediately
opposite	my	window	on	the	4th	or	5th	floor	is	the	great	dome	of
the	Russian	 church	with	 its	 two	 towers,	 and	between	 the	 dome
and	 the	 neighboring	 apartment	 house	 a	 distant	 view	 of	 a
triangular	section	of	the	Laurenziberg	with	a	tiny	church.	On	my
left	I	can	see	the	Town	Hall	with	its	massive	tower	rising	sharply
and	foreshortened	in	a	perspective	that	perhaps	no	one	has	ever
truly	observed.
But	now	I	really	mustn’t	forget	to	tell	you,	as	a	sister,	that	Max

Brod	 has	 just	 been	 to	 Berlin	 and	 greatly	 praised	 your	 brother’s
efficiency.142	What	kind	of	work	does	he	do?	He	leaves	the	house
at	7	in	the	morning	and	doesn’t	get	back	until	the	evening?	And
where	did	he	get	his	scars?

Draft	of	a	letter	to	Grete	Bloch
December	15/16,	1913

The	main	 reason,	 Fräulein	Grete,	 for	my	 not	 having	written	 before,
the	 reason	 for	 my	 inhibition	 even	 in	 my	 earlier	 letters,	 was	 the



thought	 that	whatever	 I	 intended	 to	write	 I	 invariably	 found	myself
trying,	first	to	spy	on	F.,	even	if	only	to	find	out	what	she	is	doing	at
the	moment,	secondly	that	I	was	doing	you	an	injustice,	perhaps,	by
believing	 myself	 incapable	 of	 resisting	 the	 temptation	 to	 ask	 you
questions	and	so	 forcing	you	 to	reluctant	 replies,	and,	 thirdly,	 that	 I
was	appearing	to	write	merely	to	ask	these	questions.	Now,	however,
none	 of	 these	 considerations	 can	 prevent	 me,	 for	 it	 is	 becoming	 I
won’t	 say	 “incomprehensible,”	 but	 worrying	 that	 I	 can’t	 find	 out
anything	 about	 F.,	 so	 worrying	 that	 I	 am	 writing.	 Do	 you	 know
anything	 about	 F.?	 Could	 she	 be	 ill?	 But	 from	 your	 last	 letter	 (I’m
dismayed	when	 I	 look	 at	 it,	 it’s	 nearly	 3	weeks	 old)	 I	 see	 that	 you
were	 still	 getting	 postcards	 from	 F.	 toward	 the	 end	 of	 November,
when	 there	 was	 no	 mention	 of	 illness.	 But	 even	 without	 these
indications,	 illness	 would	 not	 have	 occurred	 to	 me,	 this	 is	 not	 the
cause	of	my	anxiety.	Indeed,	the	evening	before	your	letter	arrived	I
wrote	 a	 letter	 to	 F.,	mailed	 it	 the	 following	morning—it	must	 have
been	November	28th—moreover	by	registered	mail.	Two	days	later	I
discovered	that	Max’s	wife,	who	had	seen	F.	in	Berlin	and	invited	her
for	 Christmas,	 has	 now	 expressly	 repeated	 this	 invitation	 by	 letter.
Last	Sunday	I	sent	F.	another	letter	by	express	mail.	Not	one	of	these
letters	has	been	answered.	Is	this	not,	again	I	won’t	say	“completely,”
but	 largely	 contrary	 to	her	nature?	By	what	 circumstances,	 by	what
process	 of	 reasoning	 can	 this	 be	 explained?	 Do	 you	 know	 anything
about	it,	and	would	you	tell	me?	If	you	can’t	tell	me,	I	don’t	want	pity
to	compel	you	(at	the	moment,	for	example,	even	the	scrutiny	of	1000
observers	 could	 find	 nothing	 pitiable	 about	 me;	 it’s	 about	 12:30	 at
night,	and	I’m	sitting	writing	this	letter	in	comfort,	am	absurdly	calm,
my	 feet	 wrapped	 in	 a	 rug	 and	 with	 a	 feeling	 of	 considerable	 well-
being).	 If,	 however,	 you	 can’t	 tell	 me,	 then	 say	 just	 that,	 so	 that	 I
won’t	have	to	go	on	searching	around	in	the	dark.

December	29,	1913,	afternoon	[to	January	2,	1914]
Four	times	within	the	last	ten	days,	Felice,	you	have	promised	to	write
to	me	on	 the	 actual	 day	of	making	 these	promises.	You	promised	 it
once	 in	 writing,	 via	 Dr.	 Weiss,	 once	 on	 the	 telephone,	 twice	 by
telegram;	according	to	 the	 last	 telegram,	 the	 letter	had	already	been
written	 and	was	 to	 be	mailed	 for	 certain	 the	 day	 the	 telegram	was
sent,	i.e.,	last	Sunday.	Not	one	of	these	letters	has	reached	me,	so	you
told	an	untruth	four	times.143



Outwardly	this	appears	to	make	no	sense	whatever.	You	realize	that
nothing	anywhere	around	me	is	of	the	slightest	importance	compared
to	that	promised	letter.	Which	means	you	must	also	know	that	by	not
writing	you	are	inflicting	torments	on	me	minute	by	minute—all	the
more	so	since	periodically	you	make	such	definite	promises.	You	also
know	that	now,	at	any	rate,	it	is	no	fault	of	mine,	and	that	(I	mention
this	here	only	for	the	sake	of	completeness;	in	itself	it	is	unimportant
and	perhaps	ridiculous)	at	the	merest	word	from	you	I	would	write	to
your	parents	at	once.	And	you	even	seem	to	deny	to	some	extent	that
you	are	angry	with	me,	and	with	each	of	your	promises,	in	addition	to
the	promise	itself,	you	gave	me	a	little	hope.	I	repeat,	outwardly	and
at	first	glance,	this	seems	inhuman.
Yet	I,	who	in	no	circumstances	will	let	you	go	of	my	own	free	will,
have	an	explanation	 for	 it.	 I	believe	you	 to	be	a	 thoroughly	 truthful
girl,	and	believe	you	 to	be	capable	of	 these	untruths	only	under	 the
overwhelming	pressure	of	necessity.	You	would	dearly	like	to	comfort
me,	hence	keep	promising	 that	you	will	write.	And	 then	 in	 fact	you
really	 try,	but	 find	you	 simply	 can’t,	 either	 for	practical	 or	personal
reasons.	 Since	 you	 are	 also	 an	 independent	 girl,	 the	 reasons	 are
probably	personal	ones;	which	is	worse	for	me.
Thus	 I	 provide	 the	 answers	 in	 your	 place.	 And	 now	 I	 ask	 you	 to
write	and	tell	me	only	whether	my	own	replies	are	true.	You	must	not
answer	this	by	telegram,	but	write;	to	be	convinced,	and	understand	it
properly,	 I	want	 to	 see	your	writing.	 I	 beg	you,	however,	 to	 send	 it
express	and	 to	 the	apartment,	 so	 that	 I	get	 the	 letter	on	New	Year’s
morning,	 for,	believe	me,	 I	 can’t	 get	 it	quickly	enough.	 If,	 beyond	a
simple	 “Yes”	 or	 “No,”	 you	 feel	 like	 adding	 anything	 in	 explanation,
that	 would	 be	 pure	 kindness	 on	 your	 part;	 but	 should	 these
explanations	present	even	the	slightest	difficulties,	or	delay	the	letter
by	 even	 the	 briefest	 period	 of	 time,	 then	 I	 beg	 you	 not	 to	 explain
anything.	 I	 am	 simply	 asking,	 you	 see,	 for	 a	 short,	 effortless,
noncommittal	letter.	In	it,	do	not	call	me	dear,	if	this	is	not	what	I	am
to	you,	do	not	send	me	sincere	wishes	 if	 this	 is	not	what	you	mean.
Just	a	very	brief	letter.	This	is	not	an	immoderate	request.
If	 I	 get	 that	 letter	 I	 promise,	 in	 response,	 to	 keep	 quiet,	 not	 to
bother	 you	 in	 any	 way;	 in	 fact—even	 should	 there	 be	 no	 hope—
merely	to	wait	for	you.

Franz



December	29,	1913,	evening
Having	written	 the	enclosed	 letter,	 I	went	 to	 lie	down	for	a	while	 (I
had	hardly	 slept	 the	night	 before;	 this	 is	 by	no	means	 a	 reproach,	 I
usually	sleep	very	badly	anyway),	and	then	meant	to	go	to	the	office,
where	I	have	a	lot	of	work	to	do.	Then	in	the	evening	I	meant	to	call
on	Dr.	Weiss,	who	is	 in	Prague	at	the	moment	and	wanted	me	to	go
with	him	to	a	theater	on	the	outskirts.	However,	we	won’t	get	to	the
theater,	since	it	is	now	7	o’clock	and	I	am	sitting	here,	writing.	Your
letter	arrived	at	about	5,	I	hadn’t	gone	to	sleep	yet.	Had	I	not	been	in
bed	I	should	have	answered	it	at	once;	now	I	am	glad	that	I	didn’t	and
instead	stayed	in	bed	for	about	2	hours	thinking,	not	about	myself,	for
I	am	through	with	myself,	but	about	you.
I	see	from	your	letter	that	my	request	for	a	letter	caused	you	a	great

deal	of	suffering,	not	as	much	as	your	not	writing	caused	me,	but	still
a	great	deal.	Perhaps	the	reason	why	you	were	unable	to	write	to	me
was	that	you	tried	to	write	a	letter	in	which	the	following	paragraph
would	not	occur:	“Marriage	would	mean	that	we	should	each	have	to
sacrifice	 a	 good	 deal;	 let	 us	 not	 try	 to	 establish	 where	 the	 excess
weight	would	be.	 It	 is	a	good	deal,	 for	each	of	us.”	But	you	did	not
succeed	in	writing	that	kind	of	 letter.	Nevertheless	 that	paragraph	is
terrible,	and	would	be	almost	unbearable	if	in	fact	it	was	meant	to	be
as	calculating	as	it	appears.	And	yet	I	believe	it	is	a	good	thing	that	it
was	written,	a	good	thing	even	for	our	reconciliation,	though	I	can	see
no	steps	that	would	lead	from	that	paragraph	to	a	reconciliation,	for,
as	long	as	one	calculates,	one	cannot	climb.	However,	that	is	only	my
first	 opinion;	 for	 you	are	quite	 right,	 one	has	 to	 calculate,	 unless	 to
calculate	would	be	not	wrong,	but	 futile	and	 impossible.	And	 this	 is
my	final	opinion.
You	 misunderstood	 if	 you	 imagined	 that	 what	 keeps	 me	 from

marrying	is	the	thought	that	in	winning	you	I	would	gain	less	than	I
would	lose	by	giving	up	my	solitary	existence.	I	know	you	think	this;
orally	you	expressed	yourself	in	this	way,	and	I	contradicted,	but,	as	I
see,	 not	 vehemently	 enough.	 For	 me	 it	 was	 not	 a	 matter	 of	 giving
something	up,	 for	even	after	marriage	 I	would	go	on	being	 the	very
same	person	I	am,	and	this	precisely—if	you	so	chose—is	the	serious
problem	 that	 would	 confront	 you.	 What	 prevented	 me	 was	 the
imagined	feeling	that	complete	isolation	meant	an	obligation	for	me,
not	a	gain,	not	a	pleasure	(at	least	not	in	the	sense	you	imagine),	but
duty	 and	 suffering.	 I	 don’t	 believe	 in	 it	 any	 more;	 it	 was	 pure



fabrication	 (perhaps	 this	 knowledge	 will	 help	 me	 to	 go	 on),	 and	 is
most	easily	disproved	by	the	fact	that	I	cannot	live	without	you.	Just
you,	 just	as	you	are,	 including	that	 terrible	paragraph	in	your	 letter,
that’s	the	way	I	want	you.	And	yet	not	for	the	sake	of	finding	solace,
nor	for	my	own	gratification,	but	so	that	you	should	live	with	me	here
as	an	independent	human	being.
I	had	not	 reached	 this	point	when	 I	wrote	 to	your	parents.	A	vast

number	 of	 fabrications,	 accumulated	 in	 the	 course	 of	 the	 year,	 kept
going	through	my	head	in	a	positively	deafening	fashion.	I	brought	it
to	an	end	in	my	letter	from	Venice;	I	simply	could	not	bear	the	clamor
in	my	head	any	longer.
I	 think	 I	must	now	be	 completely	 truthful	 and	 tell	 you	 something

that	no	one	in	fact	has	so	far	heard	from	me.	At	the	sanatorium	I	fell
in	love	with	a	girl,	a	child,	about	18	years	old;	she	is	Swiss,	but	lives
in	 Italy,	 near	 Genoa,	 thus	 by	 blood	 as	 alien	 to	 me	 as	 can	 be;	 still
immature	 but	 remarkable	 and	 despite	 her	 illness	 a	 real	 person	with
great	 depth.144	 A	 girl	 far	 less	 remarkable	 than	 she	 could	 have
captivated	me	at	that	time	in	my	empty,	hopeless	state;	you’ve	got	my
notes	from	Desenzano,	they	were	written	about	10	days	before.	It	was
as	clear	to	me	as	it	was	to	her	that	we	did	not	really	belong	together,
and	 that	 once	 the	 10	 days	 available	 to	 us	 had	 expired	 everything
would	 have	 to	 end,	 and	 that	 no	 letters,	 not	 a	 single	 line	 would	 be
exchanged.	Nevertheless,	we	meant	a	great	deal	to	each	other,	and	I
had	 to	make	 all	 kinds	 of	 arrangements	 to	 prevent	 her	 bursting	 into
tears	in	front	of	everyone	when	we	said	goodbye,	and	I	felt	much	the
same.	With	my	departure	it	was	all	over.
Paradoxical	as	 it	may	seem,	even	 this	helped	 to	make	my	 feelings

about	you	clearer	to	me.	Besides,	the	Italian	girl	knew	about	you,	also
knew	 that	 fundamentally	 my	 sole	 aim	 was	 to	 marry	 you.	 Then	 I
returned	 to	Prague,	 found	myself	 completely	out	of	 touch	with	you,
lost	 more	 and	 more	 courage,	 but	 did	 think	 of	 possibly	 coming	 to
Berlin	at	Christmas	and	trying	to	reach	a	decision.

January	1,	1914
First	of	all,	a	happy	New	Year	to	you,	Felice,	and,	should	you	want	it,
to	us	both.	Answering	your	letter	is	not,	after	all,	as	easy	as	I	thought.
That	one	paragraph	stands	out	so	conspicuously	and	is	lighted	from	so
many	different	angles;	 to	make	 it	disappear	altogether	 seems	almost



impossible.	This	is	why	I	meant	to	write	only	if	I	had	time	and	peace,
but	yesterday	I	had	neither,	and	today	it’s	pretty	much	the	same;	I	am
tired,	and	Felix	and	Oskar	are	coming	to	fetch	me	in	a	quarter	of	an
hour.	However,	to	be	in	contact	with	you,	I	shall	write	a	little,	for	it
does	me	good,	momentarily	makes	me	almost	happy,	 though	at	 this
particular	moment,	3:15	P.M.,	God	knows	where	you	may	be	and	God
knows	what	you	may	be	 thinking—thoughts	quite	unconnected	with
me,	 never	 to	 be	 connected	with	me.	 Nevertheless,	 the	 fact	 that	my
reply	is	so	much	delayed	doesn’t	worry	me	in	the	least,	because	your
waiting	for	my	letters	and	my	waiting	for	your	letters	are	in	no	way
comparable,	I	may	even	be	doing	you	a	favor	by	delaying.
This	is	the	first	time	(but	you	know	this,	so	I	shouldn’t	really	have
to	tell	you)	you	talk	of	losses	that	you	would	suffer	(and	this	has	to	be
emphasized)	not	only	as	a	result	of	your	leaving	Berlin,	but	even	more
from	marrying	me.	You	talk,	moreover,	not	merely	of	 the	possibility
of	 such	 losses,	 but	 of	 their	 certainty.	 Ultimately	 your	 description
shows	there	is	an	“excess	weight”	as	well,	and,	by	the	manner	of	the
reference,	it	would	probably	have	to	be	to	your	disadvantage.
This,	after	all,	is	just	what	I	have	been	trying	to	convince	you	of	for
an	entire	year.	If	it	were	the	result	of	my	efforts,	I	could	be	satisfied.
But	in	this	case	it	should	have	been	more	gradual,	not	so	sudden.	But
it	may	have	developed	during	the	time	of	not	writing,	in	which	case	it
was	gradual	after	all	and	I	was	simply	unaware	of	its	growth.	But	this
surely	contradicts	what	you	said	that	last	Sunday	[November	9,	1913]
in	Berlin;	it	is	also	contrary	to	your	entire	point	of	view,	according	to
which—regardless	of	whether	I	and	life	with	me	could	mean	for	you
something	 worth	 while—you	 would	 leave	 behind	 in	 Berlin	 nothing
that	had	any	deep,	 telling,	or	vital	 significance	 for	you.	But	perhaps
you	 have	 been	 mistaken	 about	 this	 too,	 and	 only	 recently	 have
become	 more	 aware	 of	 your	 assets.	 Perhaps	 I	 have	 helped	 you	 to
achieve	this—not	by	words,	but	by	my	very	existence.	It’s	possible.	I
have	sometimes	had	the	impression	that	what	you	possess	in	Berlin	is
indispensable	 to	 you.	 Trivial	 incidents	 in	 your	 behavior	 toward	me
could,	if	carefully	examined,	be	accepted	as	proof.	And	finally,	I	can
still	hear	ringing	in	my	ears	what	you

January	1,	1914,	midnight
told	Max’s	wife	in	Berlin—that	your	work	and	life	there	mean	a	great
deal	to	you,	and	that	your	director	had	warned	you	not	to	leave	Berlin



without	giving	it	very	careful	thought.	(The	fact	that	you	repeated	this
to	a	stranger,	a	woman	you	had	known	only	for	a	few	hours,	seemed
almost	as	bad	as	if	you	had	positively	agreed	with	your	director.)
But	 apart	 from	 this,	 Felice,	 I	 have	 to	 admit	 that	 you	 are	 right.

Taking	 a	 detached	 view,	 you	 are	 bound	 to	 lose.	 You	 stand	 to	 lose
Berlin,	your	office,	the	work	you	enjoy,	a	life	almost	free	from	worry,
that	 particular	 kind	 of	 independence,	 that	 convivial	 companionship
with	people	you	get	on	with,	life	with	your	family—and	these	are	but
the	losses	I	am	aware	of.	Instead	you	would	be	coming	to	Prague,	to	a
provincial	town	with	a	language	unfamiliar	to	you,	into	an	official’s,
moreover	not	even	a	fully	fledged	official’s,	inevitably	petty-bourgeois
household,	 you	 would	 not	 be	 short	 of	 worries;	 though	 you	 would
continue	 to	 be	 independent,	 you	 would	 nevertheless	 not	 be
unencumbered;	 and	 instead	of	 social	 life	 and	 instead	of	 your	 family
you	would	have	a	husband	who,	more	often	than	not	(now	at	any	rate
more	often	than	not)	is	melancholy	and	silent,	and	whose	infrequent
personal	happiness	lies	solely	in	an	occupation	that,	as	an	occupation,
would	 inevitably	 continue	 to	 be	 alien	 to	 you.	 And	 these	 are	 things
that	 possibly	 (I	 am	 not	 sure	 if	 I	may	mention	 this	 here)	 love	 alone
could	help	one	to	surmount.
As	 I	 said,	 there	 certainly	 is	 an	 error	 in	 your	 theory	 of	 an	 excess

weight.	 On	 my	 part	 it	 was	 never	 a	 question	 of	 “loss,”	 there	 was
merely	an	“obstacle,”	and	this	obstacle	no	longer	exists.	What’s	more,
I	venture	to	say	that	I	love	you	so	much	that	I	should	have	wanted	to
marry	you	even	if	you	had	made	it	perfectly	clear	that	you	had	but	a
faint	 liking	 for	me,	 and	 even	 this	 not	 free	 from	 doubt.	 It	 would	 be
wrong	and	underhanded	to	exploit	your	compassion	in	this	way,	but	I
wouldn’t	 be	 able	 to	 refrain.	 On	 the	 other	 hand,	 I	 admit	 it	 is	 not
possible	to	get	married	provided	and	so	long	as	you	are	aware	of	and
able	 to	 foresee	 the	 losses	 with	 as	 much	 perspicacity	 as	 one	 may
conclude	 from	your	 letter.	To	enter	upon	marriage	with	a	 conscious
sense	of	loss—this	I	admit	is	not	possible,	and	I	would	not	allow	it	to
happen	even	if	you	wanted	it,	because,	in	the	only	kind	of	marriage	I
want,	husband	and	wife,	 in	 the	very	essence	of	 their	being,	must	be
equals	in	order	to	exist	independently	within	this	unit—which	in	that
case	would	be	impossible.

January	2,	1914
But,	Felice,	 is	 this	 really	your	 serious	belief,	are	you	 really	afraid	of



losing	 something?	Do	you	 really	 treat	 yourself	with	 such	 solicitude?
No,	you	most	certainly	don’t.	To	be	explicit,	there	would	seem	to	be
only	 two	possibilities:	 either	 you	don’t	wish	 to	 have	 anything	 to	 do
with	me	and	this	 is	your	method	of	 trying	to	push	me	aside,	or	 it	 is
merely	 that	 your	 confidence	 in	me	 has	 been	 somewhat	 shaken	 and
you	are	doing	the	weighing	for	that	reason	alone.	In	the	event	of	the
former,	there	is	nothing	I	can	do	to	prevent	it	and	nothing	I	can	say:
in	that	case	it	is	all	over;	I	have	lost	you,	and	will	have	to	see	how	I
can	go	on	living,	in	the	certain	knowledge	that	I	will	never	quite	get
over	it.	In	the	event	of	the	latter,	however,	nothing	is	lost;	in	that	case
everything	between	us	is	bound	to	turn	out	well,	for	I	know	that	were
you	 to	 put	 your	 confidence	 in	 me	 to	 the	 test,	 I	 would	 pass	 it
absolutely,	no	matter	how	weak	I	might	be	at	any	particular	moment.
So	 it	 is	 up	 to	 you,	 Felice,	 to	 say	 how	 matters	 stand.	 If	 it	 is	 the

former,	then	we	must	surely	part;	if	the	latter,	then	put	me	to	the	test;
I	 cannot	believe	 in	 the	 third	possibility—that	without	deeper	 reason
you	merely	calculate	the	losses.
We	had	actually	agreed	to	abandon	the	idea	of	marriage,	and	to	go

on	writing	to	each	other	as	in	the	past.	It	was	your	suggestion,	and	I
acquiesced	since	I	could	think	of	nothing	better.	Now	I	know	what’s
better,	let’s	do	it!	Marriage	is	the	only	means	whereby	the	relationship
between	 us—so	 very	 necessary	 to	 me—can	 be	 maintained.	 I	 too
consider	our	not	 living	 in	 the	 same	city	 to	be	an	advantage,	but	 for
one	 reason	 only:	 if	we	were	 to	 get	married,	 our	marriage	would	 be
more	 likely	 to	 take	place	 later	 than	 if	we	were	 separated,	as	we	are
now.	Doubts	would	appear,	opportunities	 for	delay	would	be	 found,
and	unhappy	days	would	pass	to	no	avail.	 Indeed	they	do	so	now	in
great	abundance.
But	 you	 don’t	 take	 the	 continuation	 of	 our	 correspondence	 quite

seriously,	 either.	 What	 would	 it	 lead	 to?	 Torments	 of	 waiting	 and
chronicles	 of	 complaints.	 That	 would	 be	 all.	 Thus	 slowly	 it	 would
disintegrate,	 and	 the	 eventual	 pain	 would	 be	 far	 greater	 and	 more
poisonous.	This	we	won’t	do;	it	would	be	beyond	our	capacity	and	do
no	 one	 any	 good.	 Just	 note	 the	 effect	 of	 time	 on	 our	 relationship
wholly	confined	to	writing;	hardly	two	months	have	passed	since	you
last	wrote	to	me,	and	already	in	certain	places,	without	your	realizing
it,	little	animosities	are	beginning	to	creep	into	your	letter.	No,	Felice,
we	cannot	go	on	living	in	this	way.
I	 love	you,	Felice,	with	everything	 that	 is	good	 in	me	as	a	human

being,	with	everything	in	me	that	makes	me	deserving	of	being	astir



among	the	living.	If	it	isn’t	much,	then	I	am	not	much.	I	love	you	just
as	 you	 are,	 the	 parts	 of	 you	 I	 approve	 of,	 as	well	 as	 those	 I	 do	 not
approve	 of,	 everything,	 everything.	 You	 don’t	 feel	 this	way,	 even	 if
everything	 else	 were	 all	 right.	 You	 are	 not	 satisfied	 with	 me,	 you
object	 to	various	things	about	me,	want	me	to	be	other	 than	I	am.	 I
should	 “live	 more	 in	 the	 real	 world,”	 should	 “take	 things	 as	 I	 find
them,”	etc.	Don’t	you	realize	that	if	in	fact	it	is	an	inner	necessity	for
you	to	want	 this,	 then	you	no	 longer	want	me,	but	are	 trying	to	get
past	me.	Why	 try	 to	 change	 people,	 Felice?	 It	 is	 not	 right.	One	 has
either	 to	 take	 people	 as	 they	 are,	 or	 leave	 them	 as	 they	 are.	 One
cannot	change	them,	one	can	merely	disturb	their	balance.	A	human
being,	after	all,	 is	not	made	up	of	single	pieces,	 from	which	a	single
piece	can	be	taken	out	and	replaced	by	something	else.	Rather	he	is	a
whole,	and	if	you	pull	one	end,	the	other,	whether	you	like	it	or	not,
begins	 to	 twitch.	 However,	 Felice—even	 the	 fact	 that	 you	 object	 to
various	 things	about	me	and	want	 to	change	them,	 I	 love	even	that;
but	what	I	want	is	for	you	to	know	it.
And	now	decide,	Felice!	Your	last	letter	is	not	a	definite	decision,	it
still	 contains	 some	 question	 marks.	 You	 have	 always	 seen	 yourself
more	clearly	 than	 I	 see	myself.	 In	 this	 respect	you	must	not	now	be
inferior	to	me.
And	finally	I	kiss	the	hand	that	drops	this	letter.

Franz

To	Grete	Bloch
January	23,	19141

Dear	Fräulein	Bloch,
A	 pity	 I	 couldn’t	 talk	 to	 you	 when	 you	 were	 in	 Prague.	 I	 can’t
imagine	why	I	wasn’t	called	to	the	telephone	when	you	rang	me.	But
perhaps	 there	 was	 something	 wrong	 with	 the	 line.	 Anyway,	 the
remark	 that	 “I	 couldn’t	 be	 induced	 to	 answer	 the	 telephone”	 is
incorrect;	I	not	only	could	have	been	induced,	I	would	actually	have
dashed	to	it.	Rather,	let	us	say	that	you	were	not	overanxious	to	talk
to	me,	and	that	indeed	is	the	most	understandable	explanation.
Don’t	be	offended	by	my	failure	to	write;	actually	it	wasn’t	a	failure.
Though	 your	 last	 letter	 but	 one,	 or	 rather	 the	 one	 before	 that,	 was
very	 friendly,	 I	 couldn’t	 answer	 it.	 Oversensitive	 as	 I	 am	 about
everything	 concerning	 F.,	 I	 sensed	 something	 bitter	 in	 the	 letter,



something	 almost	 hostile—despite	 all	 its	 (not	 merely	 outward)
kindness.	I	only	sensed	it,	I	didn’t	actually	believe	it;	I	was	already	too
unjust	 to	 you	 in	 Prague	 to	 believe	 a	 thing	 of	 that	 sort	 now.
Nevertheless,	 I	couldn’t	have	answered	without	 insincerity;	 indeed,	 I
even	wrote	that	insincere	letter,	carried	it	around	in	my	pocket	for	2
days,	 and	when	at	 that	 point	 your	 last	 letter	 but	 one	 arrived,	 I	was
glad	 I	 hadn’t	 mailed	 mine.	 These	 are	 undoubtedly	 loathsome
subterfuges	 on	 my	 part.	 Nor	 is	 it	 really	 like	 me,	 I	 am	 hardly	 ever
suspicious,	I	know	how	to	appreciate	the	least	kindness,	have	received
nothing	but	kindness	from	you,	kindness	bestowed	in	a	most	unselfish
way—there	 is	 no	 explanation	 for	 my	 feeling	 other	 than	 that	 my
relationship	 with	 F.—unbearable,	 uncertain,	 yet	 forever	 piercingly
vivid—puts	me	in	an	entirely	false	position	with	you,	too.	If	 I	am	to
tell	you	frankly	what	made	that	letter	unanswerable,	it	was—this	was
not	 the	only	 reason,	but	 the	main	one—that	 there	was	nothing	 in	 it
about	F.,	whereas	in	your	earlier	 letters,	at	a	time	when	you	had	no
news	of	F.,	you	invariably	mentioned	the	fact.	I	don’t	mean	to	say	that
you	wished	 to	punish	or	 torment	me	with	 this	 silence;	no,	of	course
that	isn’t	what	I	mean	to	say,	nevertheless	for	me	it	was	both.	Perhaps
you	really	had	no	news	of	F.,	perhaps	you	wanted	to	be	questioned—
as	far	as	I	am	concerned,	these	possibilities	didn’t	change	matters.
Today,	however,	a	number	of	things	have	changed.	In	the	unlikely
case	that	you	don’t	know	(I	assume	you	spent	Christmas	in	Berlin),	I
can	tell	you,	surely,	since	it	isn’t	really	F.’s	secret:	I	have	renewed	my
request	for	her	hand	(I	am	telling	you	very	briefly,	it	went	back	and
forth	for	weeks)	and	have	received	no,	or	virtually	no,	reply.	I	could
understand	F.’s	behavior	 from	my	point	of	view,	her	silence	 I	mean,
her	letting	the	uncertainty	go	on,	but	given	her	nature,	as	I	imagined
it	to	be,	I	don’t	understand	it.
There	is	but	one	thing	I	ask	(and	I	take	your	last	unexpected	letter
as	a	favorable	sign	that,	however	little	I	deserve	it,	you	will	answer,
moreover	very	 soon,	 for	 a	 particular	 reason,	 please,	 very	 soon),	how	 is
F.?	Well?	Or	is	she	suffering?	Or	both?

Yours,	F.	Kafka

To	Grete	Bloch
January	28,	1914

Dear	Fräulein	Bloch,



There	 is	 no	 explanation	 except	 that	 in	 anything	 concerning	 or
connected	with	F.	 I	am	struck	with	a	kind	of	blindness,	made	worse
by	my	 imagining	 that	 this	 is	 just	 where	 I	 see	most	 clearly.	When	 I
think	of	my	behavior	toward	you	alone,	again	and	again	I	deplore	it,
and	then	I	start	all	over	again.	But	I	can’t	help	it;	all	the	aversion	that
my	behavior	can	arouse	in	others	I	carry	within	me	to	the	full,	and	I
have	experienced	all	its	extremes;	but	in	this	situation,	infinitely	more
than	in	any	other,	I	am	involuntarily,	as	though	by	an	unknown	hand,
twisted	this	way	and	that,	to	the	point	of	dizziness.
But	 you	know	 it	 too,	 for	 your	 letter,	 and	 this	 is	what	 amazed	me
most,	contains	not	a	word	of	reproach,	not	even	surprise	at	my	asking
F.	yet	again	to	marry	me.	I	did	it	because	there	was	no	other	way,	I
have	no	other	explanation	for	it.
F.’s	letter	to	you	(for	which	I	thank	you	very	much,	do	let	me	keep
it	 a	 little	 longer;	needless	 to	 say	F.	won’t	hear	about	 it)	 is	 kind	and
true	 and	 the	 facts,	 as	 far	 as	 I	 am	concerned,	 are	 almost	 correct.	 It’s
true	that	the	“pap”	was	“hot,”2	and	the	bit	about	the	“poor	devil”	 is
also	 true.	 But	 that	 F.	 hasn’t	written	 to	 you	 since	 is	 bad	 and	 almost
sinister.	 I	 wouldn’t	 know	 the	 dates	 of	 my	 letters	 to	 F.,	 at	 least	 not
exactly,	 if	 I	 hadn’t	 put	 them	 in	 that	 letter	 I	 once	wrote	 to	 you	 and
never	mailed,	and	which	I	happen	to	have	found	a	moment	ago.3	The
first	time	I	wrote	to	F.	after	my	visit	to	Berlin	was	on	November	27—
the	same	evening,	strangely	enough,	on	which	F.	wrote	to	you.	I	had
no	 answer.	 Later	 I	 learned	 that	 Frau	 Brod	wrote	 to	 F.	 at	 about	 the
same	time,	inviting	her	for	Christmas.	She	also	had	no	answer.	Then
about	a	fortnight	later	I	wrote	another	letter,	again	no	answer.	I	don’t
remember	the	exact	sequence	of	events	after	that;	I	must	have	written
2	 more	 letters,	 and	 sent	 2	 telegrams.	 Since	 I	 never	 had	 a	 line	 in
answer	 to	 these,	 either,	 I	 carried	 out	 the	 following	 somewhat
dreamlike	 plan,4	 actually	 conceived	 when	 half-asleep.	 (I	 mention	 it
mainly	in	order	to	excuse	my	sending	you	the	Galley.5)
I	have	a	very	good	friend	in	Berlin,	Dr.	E.	Weiss,	the	author	of	this
Galley.	I	used	to	know	him	only	slightly,	his	novel	not	at	all;	when	I
was	in	Berlin	in	November	I	spent	about	an	hour	with	him,	but	since
then,	during	 the	Christmas	holidays	 (in	Prague),	 I	 saw	a	 lot	 of	him.
Well,	early	in	December	I	asked	this	Dr.	Weiss	to	take	a	letter	from	me
to	F.’s	 office.	 In	 the	 letter	 I	 said	 little	more	 than	 that	 I	 had	 to	have
news	 from	 or	 about	 her,	 which	 was	 why	 I	 had	 sent	W.	 so	 that	 he
could	write	to	me	about	her.	While	she	read	the	letter,	W.	was	to	sit
beside	her	desk,	look	around,	wait	until	she	had	finished	reading,	and



then,	 since	he	 had	 been	 given	 no	 further	 instructions	 and	was	most
unlikely	to	get	a	reply	(for	why	should	he	get	one	when	I	never	did),
he	was	 to	 go	 away	 and	 let	me	 know	 how	 she	 looked	 and	 how	 she
seemed	to	be.	And	this	was	precisely	what	happened.	W.	was	given	a
few	lines	for	me	in	which	F.	promised	to	write	at	length	that	very	day.
This	letter	didn’t	arrive;	I	wrote	a	letter;	in	reply	I	received	a	telegram
announcing	 a	 letter;	 that	 letter	 didn’t	 arrive;	 I	 telephoned,	 again	 a
letter	was	promised	without	 fail	and	didn’t	arrive;	 I	sent	a	telegram,
received	one	in	return,	according	to	which	the	letter	to	me	had	been
written	and	was	ready	for	mailing.	Yet	it	didn’t	arrive.	I	think	I	wrote
again.	It	came	at	last.	It	contained	little,	and	what	it	did	contain	was
sad,	specifically	sad	as	well	as	sad	in	its	overall	vagueness.	Thereupon
I	wrote	a	letter	of	some	40	pages6	and	for	about	4	weeks	have	been,
or	rather	am	no	longer,	expecting	a	reply.	To	humiliate	oneself	more
profoundly	 than	 I	 did	 in	 that	 letter	 is	 impossible;	 however,	 there	 is
one	page	 in	 the	 letter	 that	 is	a	kind	of	contradiction,	a	page	written
half-consciously,	yet	a	 true	page,	which	might	make	 it	 impossible	 to
answer	 the	 letter	as	a	whole.	But	 it	can’t	be	 that,	 for	 this	page	 is	 so
closely	connected	with	the	preceding	and	following	ones	that	it	can’t
be	read	by	itself,	and	Felice,	of	all	people,	should	not	do	so.	But	if	she
did,	 she	couldn’t	have	answered	 the	 letter	even	 if	 it	hadn’t	 included
that	page.
This	is	more	or	less	all	that	has	happened.	You	spent	Christmas	in
Vienna?	Alone?	 I	was	 convinced	 you	would	 be	 going	 to	Berlin,	 and
equally	convinced	that	I	should	be	in	Berlin.	And	I	would	have	gone,
if	the	only	clear	message	I	got	from	the	telephone	conversation	hadn’t
been	 a	 request	 for	 me	 not	 to	 come	 to	 Berlin,	 a	 request	 moreover
repeated	later	by	telegram.	When	I	begged	you	for	a	quick	answer,	I
had	the	intention	of	going	to	Berlin	on	Sunday	and	if	possible	clearing
up	everything	at	one	go.	I	shan’t	do	it,	not	after	that	letter.	I	can’t	go
without	 knowing	 what	 F.	 has	 been	 feeling	 lately.	 Yet	 without
knowing,	 there	 is	 nothing	 further	 I	 can	 prove	 to	 F.	 beyond	my	 last
letter,	 I’m	not	strong	enough.	Thus	we	continue	as	before	 in	silence,
not	peace.
Please,	Fräulein	Bloch,	forgive	me	for	my	stupid	lack	of	confidence
as	well	as	for	my	confidences.	I	almost	feel	like	apologizing	for	F.	as
well,	for	it	really	seems	as	though	ever	since	F.	and	I	stopped	hurting
each	other	directly,	and	(for	my	part)	incessantly,	we	have	turned	to
you	not	in	order	to	complain,	but	to	hurt	you.
Show	that	you	forgive	me	by	kindly	accepting	the	Galley.	It	is	sent



not	merely	in	exchange	for	F.’s	letter—the	writings	of	friends	in	both
cases—but	it	gives	me	special	pleasure	to	send	you,	just	you,	this	book
of	which	I	am	very	fond.
One	more	 request:	 I	 think	 you	 know	 Erna	 Bauer,	 do	 you	 by	 any

chance	know	her	office	address?
With	kindest	regards,	yours,	F.	Kafka

To	Grete	Bloch
February	5,	1914

Dear	Fräulein	Bloch,
I	reckon	as	follows:	I	mailed	my	letter	to	you	on	Sunday,	it	reached

you	at	 latest	on	Tuesday	morning	 (Monday	was	a	holiday),	 today	 is
Thursday.	 In	 principle	 I	wouldn’t	 have	 the	 least	 occasion—let	 alone
right—to	remind	you.	Nor	would	I	do	so	if	I	knew	for	certain	that	for
some	 arbitrary	 reason	 you	 have	 not	 written,	 yet	 surely	 will	 write
before	long.	But	I	do	not	feel	this	certainty,	my	frame	of	mind	is	very
far	 removed	 from	 anything	 approaching	 certainty,	 which	 is	 why	 I
must	 immediately	 consider	 two	 possibilities	 to	 account	 for	 your
failure	 to	 write,	 possibilities	 that	 suggest	 themselves	 more	 readily
because	hitherto	you	have	spoiled	me	with	your	prompt	replies.	The
two	possibilities	are:	either	I	have	offended	you	or	you	have	bad	news
for	me.	Both	are	more	than	likely,	I	am	so	absentminded	and	unsure
of	myself	 that	I	could	well	have	perpetrated	some	absurd	idiocy	and
offended	 you,	 and	 that	 there	 should	 be	 bad	 news	 for	 me	 is,	 if
anything,	 even	 more	 likely.	 Yet	 neither	 the	 first	 nor	 the	 second	 is
sufficient	 reason	 for	 not	writing	 to	me.	On	 the	 contrary:	whatever	 I
may	 have	 written	 to	 offend	 you,	 it	 was	 but	 a	 superficial	 mistake,
therefore	 easy	 to	 forgive;	 if	 you	 read	my	 last	 letter	 again,	 you	must
agree,	and	if	you	don’t	agree	then	write	and	tell	me	so	and	it	will	be
cleared	 up	 quite	 easily.	 But	 so	 far	 as	 bad	 news	 is	 concerned,	 surely
you	know	that	I	have	been	waiting	so	long	for	news	of	any	sort	that
even	the	worst	news	would	do	me	good.
So	you	will	be	kind	enough	to	write	to	me	again,	won’t	you?

Yours,	F.	Kafka

A	 question	 I	 have	 been	meaning	 to	 ask	 for	 a	 long	 time:	 Is	 the
exhibition	 of	 office	 equipment	 going	 to	 be	 held	 in	 Prague,	 and



will	you	be	coming?

To	Grete	Bloch
[February	7,	1914]

Dear	Fräulein	Bloch,
I	want	to	reply	at	once,	not	to	tell	you	anything	important,	let	alone
important	to	your	human	predicament,	but	simply	in	order	to	write	to
you,	 in	 order	 to	 do	 something	 for	 you	no	matter	 how	pointless	 and
useless;	 it	 seems	 to	me	 that	my	basically	 false	 relationship	with	you
has	been	partly	conditioned	by	 the	 fact	 that	 (outwardly	 these	words
seem	grandiose,	inwardly	no	word	is	grand	enough)	I	have	kept	trying
to	 come	 closer	 to	 you	 by	 breaking	 out	 of	 some	 unconquerable
inhibition	which	simultaneously	thrust	me	forward	and	held	me	back,
and	despite	 all	my	 lovely	 self-knowledge	 I	 have	blamed	you	 for	my
failure.	 And	 yet	 all	 this	 is	 only	 the	 result	 of	 my	 having	 met	 you
through	F.,	 that	when	we	first	met	 in	Prague	 I	was	 forced	to	 talk	 to
you,	a	complete	stranger	after	all,	about	F.,	that	I	actually	counted	on
the	 compassion	 of	 this	 stranger	 intentionally	 (the	 intention	 follows
naturally,	one	doesn’t	presuppose	it),	that	my	loquacity	in	matters	of
this	 kind	 (if	 need	 be	 my	 loquacity	 can	 manage	 on	 a	 word	 or	 two)
knows	no	bounds	and	sickens	me	to	death—all	this	and	more	were	the
reasons	why	subsequently,	however	much	I	felt	like	it,	I	was	unable	to
write	without	uttering	those	hateful	defensive	remarks.
I	don’t	think	compassion	makes	one	any	happier,	certainly	not	any
better;	on	the	other	hand,	the	sharing	of	suffering,	if	one	is	capable	of
it	 in	 general	 and	 toward	 a	 particular	 person,	 is	 in	my	 experience	 a
blessing	and	also	makes	one	a	better	person.	After	all,	you	can’t	have
a	 pair	 of	 scales	 with	 both	 sides	 rising	 at	 the	 same	 time.	 The	 more
people	who	know	of	one’s	suffering,	the	worse	becomes	the	suffering,
and	if	not	worse	then	less	pure.	But	it	surely	becomes	worse	too,	more
substantial;	 one	 looks	 at	 it	with	 the	 others’	 eyes,	 from	other	 angles,
and	 if	 hitherto	 one	 may	 have	 seen	 and	 borne	 it	 all	 grimly	 with
narrowed	eyes,	one	now	has	to	open	them	wide	in	face	of	this	public
substantiality	and	give	in	to	the	bitter	end.	However,	if	it	becomes	no
worse,	 merely	 less	 pure,	 then	 that	 may	 be	 worse	 still,	 for	 at	 that
moment	disgust	makes	one	lose	all	hope	of	overcoming	it.
I	felt	something	of	this	kind	at	the	Schwarze	Ross,7	feel	it	each	time
I	talk	to	anyone	in	this	way,	even	my	best	friend	(for	example,	when	it



happens	 with	my	mother,	 my	 disgust	 virtually	 makes	me	 shudder).
But	 during	 these	 discussions,	 it	 must	 be	 added,	 my	 entire	 being
experiences	pleasure	and	satisfaction,	my	vanity	is	gratified—and	so,
wouldn’t	it	be	a	relief	for	me	(however	false	it	may	be)	to	shake	it	all
off	and	say:	the	other	was	to	blame?
But	 that	 is	not	all,	 I	mustn’t	 engage	 in	 these	 thoughts,	 they	won’t
get	me	anywhere,	it’s	only	in	my	feelings
[Presumably	the	continuation	of	this	letter]
that	 I	 am	 fairly	 sure.	 But	 perhaps	 this	 is	 enough	 to	 explain	 what
happened	in	the	past	and	eliminate	the	need	to	discuss	it	any	further.
Moreover,	 things	 are	 quite	 different	 now:	 you	 are	 no	 longer	 a
stranger	 to	me,	especially	since	 that	 last	 letter;	 the	anguish	which	 is
associated	with	 confessions	 (if	 they	are	not	 entirely	 forced	and	one-
sided)	 is,	after	all,	 the	anguish	of	human	relationships	 in	general;	as
long	 as	 one	 is	 alive	 one	 mustn’t	 set	 lifeless	 rules—for	 this	 and	 a
number	 of	 similar	 reasons	 (if	 you	 agree,	 and	 I	 do	 hope	 you	 will)
everything	between	us	must	be	amicable	and	we	must	be	able	to	talk
frankly	 to	 each	 other.	 And	when	writing	 about	 yourself	 you	 are	 no
longer	to	add:	“the	fact	that	you	can’t	be	interested	in	this.”
I	 shall	 not	 write	 to	 Erna	 Bauer.	 I	 really	 took	 her	 to	 be	 Felice’s
confidante;	but	even	if	she	were,	I	wouldn’t	write	to	her.	Can	I	permit
myself	to	use	roundabout	ways	to	force	F.	to	my	side?	Isn’t	it	enough
that	 I	 should	 accept	 the	 fact	 that	 you	write	 to	 F.	 on	my	behalf	 and
that	I	am	grateful	for	it?	But	you	needn’t	have	kept	it	a	secret	that	I
wrote	to	you;	you	would	have	been	entitled	to	say	anything,	and	not
merely	 because	 it’s	 so	 uncertain	 whether	 help	 of	 any	 kind	 is	 still
possible.	 F.	 has	 lost	 confidence	 in	me;	 indeed	 there	 are	many	 good
reasons	for	it,	and	that	page	to	which	I	referred	earlier,	in	the	40-page
letter,	 is	 not	 the	 least	 important	 one.	 And,	 with	 her	 confidence,
whatever	else	F.	may	have	felt	for	me	has	also	vanished.	What	is	F.	to
do?	But	why	she	doesn’t	write	to	you	I	am	at	a	loss	to	explain.
You	ask	why	F.’s	last	letter	was	sad.	Here	is	one	sentence:	“Marriage
would	mean	that	we	should	each	have	to	sacrifice	a	good	deal;	let	us
not	 try	 to	 establish	where	 the	 excess	weight	would	 be.	 It	 is	 a	 good
deal,	 for	 each	 of	 us.”	 This	 sentence	 is	 really	 so	 dreadful	 (however
much	 actual	 truth	 it	may	 contain)	 that	 it	 can’t	 possibly	 express	 F.’s
feelings.	It	is	so	contrary	to	F.’s	nature,	must	be	contrary	to	it,	but	the
very	 fact	 that	she	was	capable	of	putting	that	sentence	on	paper,	no
matter	for	what	reason,	is	sad	and	deprives	me	of	almost	any	hope	for
the	 future.	 Incidentally,	 it	 was	 not	 a	 letter	 written	 without	 careful



consideration,	 it	 is	 supposed	 to	have	been	preceded	by	a	number	of
letters	that	were	never	mailed	(as	she	also	wrote	in	the	letter	to	you).
Insofar	 as	 F.	 and	 I	 have	 a	 joint	 future,	 it	 seems	 to	 exist	 only	 in	 the
letter	you	have	now	written.
If	 you	 feel	 like	 it,	 do	 tell	me	who	 the	man	 in	Munich	 is.	 Can	 he

neither	see	nor	hear?	What	makes	you	so	important	to	him,	and	him
to	 you?	 Didn’t	 you	 once	 tell	 me	 or	 write	 that	 you	 are	 thinking	 of
joining	the	South	German	branch	of	your	firm	next	year?	And	what	is
the	meaning	of	that	passage	in	your	letter	which	refers	to	the	“basic
condition	 of	marriage,”	 and	which	 I	 don’t	 quite	 understand?	By	 the
way,	 I	 have	 thought	 of	 something	 quite	 unconnected	with	 this.	 You
once	wrote	that	your	room	is	dark	and	that	you	can’t	afford	a	better
one.	How	is	this,	since	your	salary	is	adequate?	What	a	profuse	writer
and	profuse	questioner	I	have	become!	I’ll	stop	now.	Farewell!

Yours,	F.	Kafka

The	book	should	have	arrived	at	the	same	time	as	my	letter.	I	will
go	and	inquire	at	the	bookshop	tomorrow.

To	Grete	Bloch
February	8,	1914

Deal	Fräulein	Bloch,
I	am	sorry	for	all	our	sakes,	needless	to	say	for	yours	in	particular,

that	you	were	forced	to	be	untruthful	in	your	letter	to	F.	and	perhaps
even	 in	 your	 telegram	 (how	 can	 I	 ever	 thank	 you	 for	 it?).	 But	 of
course	what	 is	 bad	 is	 not	 the	 untruthfulness	 but	 the	 situation	 itself,
which	by	now	can	be	approached	only	with	untruths.
You	are	right,	 the	sentence	in	F.’s	 letter	 is	bad.	Outwardly	it	 is	no

more	than	a	misunderstanding	of	matters	of	which	I	have	been	trying
to	 convince	 her	 for	 a	whole	 year;	 yet	 inwardly	 it	 is	 probably	more
than	mere	misunderstanding.	Although	the	letter	doesn’t	consist	only
of	 that	 one	 sentence,	 that	 sentence	 stands	 out.	 The	most	 depressing
aspect	 is	that	 it	doesn’t	agree	with	anything	I	know	about	F.;	on	the
other	hand,	 there	 is	no	definite	mention	anywhere	of	a	 fundamental
change.
I	am	very	pleased	 that	you	 liked	 the	Galley.	Once	one	has	pushed

one’s	 head	 through	 the	 construction	 that	 surrounds	 the	whole	novel
like	a	fence	(actually	I	don’t	quite	know	how	this	can	be	accounted	for



in	W.’s	character),	one	is	almost	dazzled	by	its	vitality.	I	may	soon	be
able	to	send	you	something	else	by	him.
By	the	way,	how	do	you	spend	your	Sundays?	After	your	exertions
during	the	week?	Is	it	wise	to	exert	yourself	in	this	way?	Will	you	be
able	 to	keep	 it	up	 for	 long?	What	was	 the	 illness	you	told	me	about
the	 other	 day?	The	 time	you	 spent	 on	 your	 last	 letter	was	 probably
snatched	 from	your	 lunch	hour;	 that	 is	 as	wrong	as	 it	 is	 kind.	But	 I
won’t	 say	 any	more,	 for	 I	 am	now	altogether	more	 indebted	 to	 you
than	to	any	other	human	being;	of	this	I	am	well	aware,	in	spite	of	my
head	which	at	this	moment	(do	all	 things	have	to	reach	the	point	of
utter	absurdity?)	is	quite	numb	with	toothache.

Yours,	F.	Kafka

February	9,	1914
In	spite	of	everything,	F.,	in	spite	of	everything	(and	this	“everything”
is	a	great	deal),	when	your	postcard	arrived	today,	it	was	again	as	on
the	first	day.	On	this	postcard,	casually	handed	to	me	by	the	clerk	as
an	object	of	no	importance,	there	are	once	more	words	addressed	by
you	to	me,	good	rather	than	bad	even	if	ambiguous	words,	but	at	any
rate	words	from	you	to	me,	at	least	you	show	yourself	to	me,	you	wish
to	have	something	to	do	with	me	after	all,	whatever	the	occasion—I
felt	faint	with	joy	when	I	read	it;	the	apple	I	was	about	to	eat	was	not
merely	put	aside,	it	simply	dropped	from	my	hand.	Later,	much	later,
when	I	had	to	do	some	dictating—the	moment	I	tried	to	lose	myself	in
my	dictation,	 it	went	 through	my	head	at	once:	“What’s	 the	matter?
Why	 do	 you	 feel	 so	 different?”	 and	 I	 knew	 at	 once	 why	 I	 felt	 so
different.
Not	that	anything	has	happened;	you	write	to	me,	but	who	knows
what	 it	 implies.	 Is	 it	 right	 to	 assume	 you	 felt	 you	 had	 to	write	 this
postcard,	 even	 though	 you	 could	 hardly	 bring	 yourself	 to	 write	 the
last	 letters?	Is	this	right?	No,	 that	 is	not	quite	 the	way	 it	 is,	nor	can
have	been.	Whatever	the	reason,	F.,	don’t	withdraw	the	hand	you	now
hold	out	 to	me,	however	weakly.	 Let	me	hold	on	 to	 it,	 as	 you	once
allowed	me	to.
But	now	I	 recall	your	 last	 letter	again	and	 the	“excess	weight.”	 In
the	light	of	this,	am	I	entitled	to	try	and	lure	you	from	a	position	in
which	you	feel	at	ease,	needless	to	say	relatively	at	ease	(I	do	finally
seem	to	have	convinced	you	of	this,	unless	it	is	that	I	have	robbed	you



of	some	other	conviction),	and	draw	you	over	to	me?	But	there	isn’t
time	to	talk	about	this	now,	either.
There	is	only	time	now,	F.,	to	beg	you	not	to	turn	so	silent	again	as
to	 make	 one	 dash	 to	 and	 fro	 here	 in	 Prague	 (for	 me	 Berlin	 really
hangs	 over	 Prague	 like	 the	 sky	 over	 the	 earth)	 in	 one’s	 desperate
bewilderment—blindly,	 heedless,	 and	 forever	 toying	 with	 the	 same
thoughts,	about	which	this	is	not	the	right	time	to	talk,	either.	That	is
all	I	ask	of	you,	nothing	else.	Tell	me	frankly	what	you	think;	I	shall
reply	likewise.	What	I	think,	I	don’t	have	to	tell	you:	the	best	part	of	it
you	know	already.

Franz

To	Grete	Bloch
February	9,	1914

Dear	Fräulein	Bloch,
A	card	from	F.	has	arrived,	a	short	but	nevertheless	friendly	card;	as
a	matter	of	fact	I	have	ceased	to	trust,	to	rely	upon	this	friendliness,
for	F.	has	never	written	to	me	in	a	less	friendly	fashion.	But	so	far	as
you	are	 concerned	 this	 doesn’t	matter,	 nor	does	 it	matter	how	 I	 am
going	to	square	my	conscience	over	this	extorted	postcard	(the	all	but
transparent	 final	 remark	 of	 which	 reads:	 “I	 had	 to	 write	 this
postcard”).	What	matters,	rather,	is	that	the	card	is	here,	that	I	alone
couldn’t	have	brought	it	about,	that	F.,	of	her	own	free	will,	couldn’t
have	written	 it,	 and	 that	 I	 owe	 it	 entirely	 to	 you.	What	 power	 you
have	over	F.!
Perhaps	 I	 shall	 have	 some	 news	 from	 you	 tomorrow,	 and	 you
probably	know	about	 the	postcard	already.	Now	 that	 I	 am	 infinitely
more	indebted	to	you	than	I	have	been	hitherto,	words	almost	fail	me,
I	 feel	 so	 humiliated,	 and	 not	 just	 humiliated,	 that	 wouldn’t	 matter,
would	be	my	due,	but	I	feel	as	if	I	had	humiliated	you	by	asking	you
to	extract	the	card	from	F.	in	this	way	(in	this	way,	what	am	I	saying?
It	wasn’t	possible	 in	any	other).	Don’t	mention	 it	 again,	 I	 know	 this
feeling	will	pass,	in	this	respect	my	sensitivity	is	only	slightly	greater
than	my	 forgetfulness,	 but	 I	had	 to	 say	 it	 so	 that	prior	 to	 and	more
important	than	expressing	my	gratitude	I	could	ask	you	to	forgive	me.

Yours,	F.	Kafka



To	Grete	Bloch
February	11,	1914

Dear	Fräulein	Bloch,	no,	I	don’t	believe	it,	and	you	too	write	without
believing	 it;	 but	 for	 your	 letter,	 F.	 would	 not	 have	 written	 to	 me.
Don’t	misunderstand	me,	 I	am	quite	content	 that	 she	didn’t	write	 to
me	 of	 her	 own	 accord;	 after	 all,	 I	 want	 her	 to	 be	 like	 that,	 or,	 in
clearer	and	simpler	terms,	I	want	her	to	be	precisely	what	she	is.	If	I
were	 to	go	 in	 for	 sophistry,	 I	 should	have	 to	say	(I	am	not	saying	 it
but	am	not	hiding	it	 from	you,	either)	that	it	 is	more	painful	for	me
that	 she	wrote,	more	painful	 than	 if	 she	hadn’t	written;	 for	 it	 shows
that	her	resistance	was	of	a	kind	that	can	be	overcome,	overcome	by
you,	yet	not	by	me.
What	 you	 say	 about	mutual	 help	 is	 not	 quite	 correct.	 If	 someone

falls	 into	 the	water	and	another,	hearing	his	 screams,	pulls	him	out,
this	is	a	normal	case	of	rendering	assistance,	and	between	friends	does
not	have	to	create	a	sense	of	“indebtedness.”	You,	however,	in	order
to	 help	me	were	 forced	 to	 be	 untruthful,	 thus	 had	 to	 do	 something
you	 certainly	wouldn’t	 have	done	 to	 save	 yourself,	 something	 that	 I
perhaps,	but	only	perhaps,	wouldn’t	do	either,	in	order	to	save	myself.
So	that	is	why	I	am	“indebted”	to	you,	because	you	didn’t	merely	have
to	 do	 something	 for	me	 but	 at	 the	 same	 time	 had	 to	 do	 something
against	yourself.	Owing	to	your	good	nature	you	may	not	have	taken
this	too	hard,	which	makes	it	all	the	harder,	to	the	point	of	nausea,	for
me.	 May	 I	 ask	 you	 (though	 not	 for	 the	 purpose	 of	 cancelling	 my
“indebtedness”;	such	cancellation	is	out	of	the	question)	in	your	very
next	letter	to	F.	to	admit	frankly,	without	sparing	me	in	any	way,	that
I	knew	about	your	first	letter,	in	fact	had	prevailed	upon	you	to	write
it	and	had	thereby	hoped,	with	justification	as	it	turned	out,	to	obtain
some	 news	 of	 her.	 Please,	 dear	 Fräulein	 Bloch,	 do	 tell	 her	 that;
moreover,	 make	 it	 irrespective	 of	 what	 F.	 answers	 me,	 which,
incidentally,	 is	 something	 that	 has	 not	 occurred	 as	 yet,	 although	 it
could	have	by	now.
Your	last	 letter	gave	me	a	very	clear	picture	of	your	life.	Here	too

the	weather	is	dull,	but	at	2	P.M.	the	light	has	to	be	switched	on	only
in	dark	back	rooms	such	as	yours.	I	don’t	think	I	ever	knew	that	you
played	the	piano	and	liked	music.	With	whom	do	you	play	the	piano,
and	go	on	excursions	into	the	mountains?	I	envy	you	your	addiction
to	sleep.	How	you	must	indulge	it	on	Sunday	afternoons	in	your	dark
room!	If	only	I	could!	If	only	sleep	would	pay	some	attention	to	me!



While	I	had	toothache	and	because	it	made	my	head	numb	(the	pain
itself	has	 gone;	had	 I	 known	about	 camomile	 tea	 I	 should	have	had
some,	but	medicines	must	never	be	suggested	 to	me),	 I	did	sleep	on
and	off,	but	for	the	last	2	days	hardly	at	all.	The	kind	of	sleep	I	know
—with	its	superficial	dreams	that	are	not	at	all	fantastic,	but	merely	a
more	 agitated	 repetition	 of	 the	 day’s	 thoughts—is	 definitely	 more
wakeful	and	strenuous	 than	being	awake.	There	are	moments	 in	 the
office	 while	 talking	 or	 dictating	 when	 my	 sleep	 is	 more	 real	 than
when	 I	am	asleep.	And	you	have	 this	addiction	 to	 sleep!	Sleeping	 is
better	 than	 reading;	 with	 this	 reservation	 in	 mind	 I	 will	 suggest	 a
book,	a	splendid	book	in	fact,	moreover	one	that	embodies	all	 that’s
good	 about	 Vienna.	 Please	 read	 it!	 My	 Life	 by	 Countess	 Lulu
Thürheim,	published	by	Georg	Müller,	2	volumes.	You	will	certainly
find	 it	 at	 the	 university	 library.	 It’s	 expensive,	 12	 marks,	 I	 think,
unbound.

Kind	regards,	yours,	F.	Kafka

To	Grete	Bloch
February	14,	1914

Dear	 Fräulein	 Bloch,	 although	 you	 are	 very	 depressed	 you	 are
working—there	 is	 no	 such	 thing	 as	working	 “in	 spite	 of	 it,”	 in	 that
sense—you	work	and	earn	exceptionally	high	wages	for	your	age,	you
take	no	time	off,	you	have	transferred	your	entire	existence	to	Vienna,
are	preparing	yourself	to	leave	again	and,	if	anything,	to	work	harder;
in	 that	 case	 you	must	 have	 at	 your	 disposal	 energy	which	 you	 can
draw	upon	 in	 future.	 It’s	not	a	waning	of	energy	you	 feel,	 that’s	not
the	way	to	express	it,	it’s	just	that	in	youth	there	is	a	lassitude	that	is
unknown	 to	 age,	 in	 compensation	 for	 all	 the	 rest.	 Shedding	 tears	 in
the	gallery	at	 the	opera	doesn’t	mean	a	waning	of	energy,	don’t	you
believe	it.	In	Prague,	during	the	admittedly	rare	moments	(it	was	my
fault	they	were	so	rare)	when	you	were	a	little	more	cheerful	(in	the
sense	 of	 being	 lively	 and	 sensible,	 you	 were	 always	 more	 cheerful
than	I),	the	expression	on	your	face	was	that	of	a	perfectly	normal	and
healthy	 child.	 True,	 your	 expression	didn’t	 quite	 fit	 the	 rest	 of	 your
personality,	especially	your	superiority	so	far	as	I	was	concerned,	yet
it	did	seem	to	be	your	very	own	expression.	This	was	noticeable,	for
example,	 on	 several	 occasions	 at	 the	 coffeehouse	 when	 you	 were
talking	 about	 your	 schooldays,	 and	 once	 outside	 the	 Kunstgewerbe



Museum	when	you	stumbled.
Vienna	may	be	to	blame,	though	now	you	speak	highly	of	it	again.
It’s	not	always	the	best	thing	to	be	so	resigned.	I	couldn’t	imagine	you
so	 sad	 in	Berlin,	 and	 I’m	 certain	 you	weren’t	when	 you	were	 there.
Here,	 one	 could	 sometimes	 think,	 the	 gay	ones	 become	 sad	 and	 the
sad	 ones	 sadder	 still.	 I	 can	 think	 of	 no	 explanation,	 nor	 is	 one
necessary,	 for	 it	 isn’t	 true	and	only	shows	how	undiscerning	sadness
is.	For	my	part,	I	wouldn’t	want	to	be	in	Vienna,	not	even	in	May.	It
was	 far	 too	unpleasant	 for	me	there,	nothing	on	earth	would	 induce
me	 to	 set	 out	 again	 for	 the	 House	 of	 Parliament,	 revisit
Kärntnerstrasse,	Stephansplatz,	sit	at	the	Cafés	Beethoven	or	Museum,
let	alone	the	Ratskeller,	and	never	again	would	I	feel	like	wandering
about	alone	 in	 the	gardens	of	Schönbrunn	on	a	 rather	cool	but	very
sunny	 morning.	 I	 have	 no	 wish	 to	 relive	 all	 that	 and	 a	 great	 deal
more,	 it	 has	 all	 been	 atoned	 for	 once	 and	 for	 all.	 The	 Grillparzer
Room8	 in	City	Hall	 is	 the	one	 thing	 I	 should	 like	 to	see,	 I	missed	 it,
not	 having	 heard	 of	 it	 until	 too	 late.	 Do	 you	 know	 “The	 Poor
Musician”	by	Grillparzer?	That	one	can	well	and	truly	suffer	in	Vienna
was	certainly	proved	by	Grillparzer.
Needless	 to	 say,	 I	 no	 longer	 ask	 you	 to	 give	 F.	 an	 explanation;	 I
asked	merely	because	I	thought	the	postcard	implied	the	beginning	of
better	 times	 and	 I	 didn’t	 want	 to	 think	 I	 had	 obtained	 this
improvement	 fraudulently	 by	 being	 untruthful	 as	well	 as	 by	 forcing
you	to	be	so.	But	now	the	card	implies	something	quite	different.	I	am
copying	it	in	full,	it	is	written	with	a	wretched	pencil	and	will	soon	be
illegible:	“Berlin,	Anhalt	Station,	Feb.	8,	1914,	10:30	P.M.
“Franz,	I	am	sitting	here	in	the	waiting	room	to	meet	my	sister,	who
is	 arriving	 from	 Dresden.	 Let	 me	 send	 you	 many	 sincere	 greetings.
One	of	these	days	you	will	be	hearing	more	from	me.	I	had	to	write
this	postcard.	Affectionately,	Felice.”
So	 F.	 got	 your	 letter	 on	 Saturday,	 couldn’t	make	 up	 her	mind	 to
write,	 then	 on	 Sunday	 evening	 she	 happened	 to	 be	 sitting	 at	 the
Anhalt	Station,	yielded	to	a	passing	impulse,	and	wrote	this	postcard,
thereby	the	following	day	felt	obliged	to	you	send	a	card	as	well;	her
card	 to	me,	however,	was	 intended	 to	do	no	more	 than	 introduce	a
renewed	 silence,	 reemphasized	 by	 this	 card,	 for	 to	 my	 immediate
letter	 to	which	there	should	have	been	a	reply,	 there	was	none.	The
terrible	or	the	good	thing	is	that	nearly	all	assumptions	are	wrong.

Kindest	regards,	yours,	F.	Kafka



To	Grete	Bloch
February	19,	1914

Dear	 Fräulein	 Bloch,	 it	 will	 always	 be	 like	 this	 (unless,	 contrary	 to
your	usual	punctuality,	you	don’t	answer	or	you	stipulate	in	advance
that	you	don’t	mean	to	answer	for	1	or	2	weeks,	which	I	should	have
to	 accept),	 I	 must	 admonish	 or	 at	 least	 remind	 you	 at	 once,	 for
unfortunately	I	was	brought	up	to	fear	behind	every	silence	some	snag
that	could	undo	me.	I	hope	it	is	nothing	of	the	kind,	merely	that	you
have	so	much	work	to	do,	which	is	bad	enough—or,	which	would	be
better,	that	the	Countess	Thürheim	[My	Life]	is	keeping	you	up	night
after	night.
By	 the	 way,	 since	 my	 last	 letter	 I	 have	 had	 a	 strange	 stroke	 of

fortune	which	I	must	not	hide	from	you	whom	I	don’t	spare	with	my
troubles.	The	 last	 of	my	closer,	unmarried,	unengaged	 friends	 [Felix
Weltsch]	has	got	engaged;	while	I	have	foreseen	this	engagement	for	3
years	 (for	 the	 outsider,	 no	 great	 perspicacity	was	 required),	 he	 and
she	have	known	of	it	for	a	mere	fortnight.	Thus	to	some	extent	I	am
losing	a	 friend,	 for	 a	married	 friend	 isn’t	 a	 true	one.	Anything	he	 is
told	will	be	revealed	 to	his	wife	either	silently	or	explicitly,	and	the
woman	 in	 whose	 head	 all	 information	 doesn’t	 become	 distorted
probably	doesn’t	exist.	Moreover,	even	if	this	were	not	so,	one	can	no
longer	 think	 of	 him	 alone,	 cannot	 expect	 from	 him	 that	 intimate
comfort	and	help,	nor	even	assume	the	possibility	of	such	comfort	or
help,	 for	now,	whatever	happens,	one	 is	 faced	by	a	partnership.	But
apart	 from	the	 fact	 that	 I	naturally	wish	him	the	best	of	everything,
there	 is	 also	a	 lucky	 side	 to	 it	 for	me,	at	 least	 for	 the	moment.	For,
though	we	are	not	all	that	old,	as	a	matter	of	fact	he	is	6	months	my
junior,	we	formed	a	kind	of	bachelor	fraternity	which,	for	me	at	any
rate,	had	moments	of	being	downright	spectral.	This	is	now	dissolved;
I	am	free;	alone	everyone	can	be	what	he	wants	to	be	and	is;	in	such
an	isolated	structure	no	one,	not	even	its	owner,	can	look	all	the	way
to	 the	 bottom	 and	 get	 scared	 down	 there,	whereas	 a	 group	 is	more
accessible	and	more	capable	of	inspection.	Congratulate	me,	even	if	it
is	merely	 a	 disguised	 request	 for	 a	 letter.	What	 is	 your	 view	 of	 F.’s
postcard?

Kind	regards,	F.K.

To	Grete	Bloch



[Started	on	February	21	or	22,	finished	on	February	25,	1914]
Dear	 Fräulein	 Bloch,	 you	 mustn’t	 deprive	 me	 of	 words	 as	 ugly	 as
“states	 of	 mind	 unworthy	 of	 mention”;	 they	 are	 mine	 and	 have	 no
business	to	appear	in	your	letters.	I	sometimes	think	that	to	the	very
limits	of	human	capacity	I	can	share	(not	sympathize;	man	makes	no
distinction,	 only	 God)	 with	 others	 the	 experience	 of	 their	 state	 of
mind;	please,	do	not	refer	to	the	states	of	mind	of	a	person	with	whom
I	 am	very	much	 concerned	 as	 “unworthy	of	mention.”	They	 are	 not
unworthy	 from	 the	point	 of	 view	of	 the	narrator,	 nor	 is	 the	 listener
unworthy	of	them,	though	in	other	respects	nothing	bad	enough	can
be	said	about	him.
It	may	be	necessary	 to	 take	honesty	yet	one	 step	 further.	My	 first
letter	to	you	was	written	entirely	on	account	of	F.;	of	this	there	is	no
doubt	whatever.	 I	wanted	help	and	yet	 I	was	 rude,	 like	an	unhappy
child.	That	was	one	of	the	reasons	why	you	once	reproached	yourself
so	 profoundly	 on	 account	 of	my	 trip	 to	 Berlin.	All	 these	 ideas	must
have	occurred	to	you	on	account	of	my	letters.	You	once	wrote:	“The
events	of	 the	month	of	November.”	What	 sort	of	events?	What	were
they	but	things	that	had	recurred	almost	continuously	for	the	past	18
months	like	drumbeats	from	sticks	held	in	my	own	wretched	hands.
However,	 the	 letters	 asking	 you	 for	 help	 are	 of	 the	 past.	 You	 did
what	 you	 could	 and	 in	 your	 kindness	 almost	more	 than	 you	 should
have	done.	You	draw	the	unhappiness	of	this	situation	upon	yourself
from	right	and	left;	in	Prague	you	were	forced	to	put	up	with	my	“No”
(there	 must	 be	 something	 in	 me	 after	 all,	 since	 I	 was	 capable	 of
summoning	the	nerve	for	that	first	short	letter	to	you),	and	now	you
hear	 F.’s	 “No”—more	 painful	 to	 you	 and	moreover	 ambiguous.	 So	 I
am	no	 longer	 asking	 for	help,	which	means	 that	 a	 great	 change	has
taken	place,	 for	 in	 the	past	 I	 should	have	asked	even	more	urgently
had	it	not	been	for	the	pretense,	no	longer	justified,	that	I	was	writing
to	 you	 merely	 to	 ask	 for	 your	 help;	 a	 pretense	 that	 I	 confess	 was
justified	 for	 longer	 than	 I	was	 outwardly	 prepared	 to	 admit.	 I	 don’t
want	any	more	help,	all	 I	want	(as	 long	as	you	want	it	a	 little)	 is	 to
hear	 how	 you	 are.	 If	 some	 news	 about	 F.	 creeps	 in,	 so	 much	 the
better,	but	even	then	it	won’t	be	the	main	point.	If	there	is	any	help
for	 us,	 for	 F.	 and	 me,	 it	 is	 up	 to	 ourselves,	 which	 has	 been
demonstrated	by	your	effort	and	the	reward	it	brought.	After	all,	what
is	 at	 stake	 here	 is	 not	 a	 practical	 matter	 in	 which	 another	 person
could	help,	it	is	a	matter	of	responsibility	both	here	and	there,	though



more,	 infinitely	 more	 so	 here.	 Perhaps	 one	 day	 this	 self-help	 will
succeed,	even	if	my	hair	turns	white	in	the	process,	but	then	my	hair
turns	white	quite	rapidly.
So	will	you	regard	your	letters	to	me	in	this	light?

February	25

The	above	was	written	3	or	4	days	ago;	I	had	planned	the	letter
to	contain	an	interminable	message,	was	forced	to	stop,	and	then
—as	 is	 the	way	with	unfinished	things—it	 lay	 there	 for	days.	 In
any	case	I	would	have	finished	it	today.
Now,	dear	Fräulein	Bloch,	see	how	strange	it	is.	F.’s	letter	and

mine	were	probably	written	on	the	same	day.	Compare	them.

II

You	 are	 not	 doing	wrong	 by	 quoting	 sentences	 from	 F.’s	 letter;
you	are	doing	 right,	 being	very	kind,	 very	understanding.	What
you	are	doing	isn’t	wrong,	what	is	wrong	is	the	situation	you	find
yourself	 in	 at	 this	 moment,	 owing	 to	 F.’s	 behavior	 as	 well	 as
mine.	At	first	I	was	very	sorry	about	F.’s	letter,	less	on	account	of
its	contents	than	because	of	its	arrival	at	this	particular	moment.
Yet	had	 I	not	been	 told	about	 it,	 I	 should	have	been	even	more
embarrassed,	 although	of	 course	 embarrassment	 is	no	 longer	an
issue.
Enough	for	today,	though	I	think	I	have	a	great	deal	to	tell	you.

Next	time.	It	is	7	P.M.	and	I	am	still	in	the	office;	foreseeing	that	I
wouldn’t	do	much	work,	 I	brought	along	the	unfinished	 letter.	 I
shall	write	 to	 you	 again	 soon;	 needless	 to	 say,	 F.	will	 not	 hear
about	your	letter.
What’s	 the	 point	 of	 sleeping	 in	 a	 half-lighted	 room?	 Such

experiments	are	not	good.	Why	the	light,	since	you	sleep	in	spite
of	it?	Isn’t	the	light	bound	to	disturb	your	sleep	or	at	least	have	a
bad	effect	on	it?	Especially	since	 it	appears	to	be	gaslight.	 If	so,
how	can	the	window	be	kept	open	at	night,	as	it	surely	must	be?	I
personally	 wouldn’t	 press	 these	 questions,	 it	 is	 merely	 the
practitioner	of	natural	therapy	in	me	who	does.

Kind	regards,	F.K.

To	Grete	Bloch



[PICTURE	POSTCARD:	POSTMARK:	Dresden,	March	1,	1914]

Kindest,	kindest	regards.	Dresden	railway	station.	Have	been	to	Berlin.
It	couldn’t	have	been	worse.	Next	thing	will	be	impalement.	You	will
get	detailed	letter.

Yours,	F.

To	Grete	Bloch
March	2,	1914

Dear	Fräulein	Bloch,	I	have	just	written	a	long	letter	to	Felice,9	I	don’t
know	if	I	am	in	the	right	frame	of	mind	to	tell	you	about	my	trip	(you
got	my	postcard	from	Dresden?).	On	the	other	hand,	it	is	true	that	if	I
owe	a	report	and	feel	the	urge	to	report	to	anyone,	then	it	is	to	you,	to
you	 alone.	 If	 there	 was	 any	 comfort	 in	 these	 two	 days,	 it	 was	 the
thought	of	you,	your	loyalty	and	honesty.
Judging	by	today’s	postcard	you	don’t	seem	to	have	quite	gathered

from	my	 last	 letter	 that	 I	 intended	 to	 go	 to	 Berlin.	 I	 had	 definitely
decided	 about	 10	 days	 ago,	which	 is	why	 I	 said	 that	 F.’s	 letter	 had
come	at	an	inopportune	moment,	for	it	made	it	seem	as	though	I	was
going	 on	 account	 of	 this	 letter,	 which	 in	 turn	 must	 have	 made	 F.
realize	that	you	had	communicated	to	me	a	part	of	this	letter.	But	it
didn’t	come	to	that;	I	told	a	lie,	saying	I	hadn’t	heard	from	you	for	a
fortnight,	 which	 F.	 accepted	 quite	 readily,	 the	 more	 so	 since	 she
hasn’t	had	a	reply	from	you	either,	 though	she	was	expecting	it	 that
very	 Saturday	 (I	 arrived	 at	 the	 same	 time	 as	 the	 mailman).	 F.
maintained	 that	 you	 were	 now	 “taking	 your	 revenge,”	 which	 I
maliciously	enjoyed.	(I	didn’t	get	much	opportunity	for	enjoyment.)
I	 had	 taken	 a	 day	 off	 and	 arrived	 in	 Berlin	 on	 Friday	 night,	 still

uncertain	whether	 F.	was	 actually	 in	Berlin.	On	 Saturday	morning	 I
went	 to	 F.’s	 office,	 asked	 the	 girl	 to	 take	 a	 card	 to	 F.	 (a	 certain
Gotthart’s	card	which	I	happened	to	have	on	me	at	the	time;	I	had	no
wish	to	be	stared	at	in	case	my	name	should	be	familiar	to	the	girl),
and	waited.	Before	me	stood	 the	 switchboard	which	 in	my	case	had
never	proved	to	be	of	use.	I	was	very	happy	to	be	there.	Then	F.	came
out	 (there	 were	 a	 lot	 of	 people	 in	 her	 room	 at	 the	 time),	 she	 was
rather	 but	 not	 unduly	 surprised,	 quite	 friendly,	 and	 we	 stood	 there
together	for	a	little	while.	Then	at	lunchtime	I	spent	an	hour	with	her



in	a	tea	shop.	After	the	office	(I	then	saw	her	room)	we	walked	about
for	two	hours.	That	evening	F.	went	to	a	ball	which,	so	she	said,	she
ought	 not	 to	 miss	 for	 business	 reasons.	 Sunday	 morning	 we	 spent
more	 than	 3	 hours	 going	 for	 a	 walk	 and	 in	 a	 coffeehouse.	 In	 the
afternoon	 I	 left,	 F.	 had	 firmly	 promised	 to	 come	 but	 didn’t.	 As	 a
matter	 of	 fact,	 today	 she	 does	 apologize	 by	 telegram,	 it	 had	 been
impossible;	the	impossibility	is	called	Aunt	Marta,	or	something	of	the
kind.
The	 result	 of	 all	 this	was	 as	 follows:	 F.	 quite	 likes	me,	 but	 in	her
opinion	this	 is	not	enough	for	marriage,	 for	this	particular	marriage;
she	has	 insurmountable	 fears	 about	 a	 joint	 future;	 she	might	not	be
able	to	put	up	with	my	idiosyncrasies;	she	might	not	be	able	to	forego
Berlin;	 she	 is	 afraid	 of	 having	 to	 dispense	 with	 nice	 clothes,	 of
traveling	 third	 class,	 sitting	 in	 cheaper	 seats	 in	 the	 theater	 (this
sounds	ridiculous	only	when	put	on	paper),	etc.	On	the	other	hand	she
is	 friendly	 toward	 me	 (not	 in	 conversation,	 of	 course;	 she	 doesn’t
answer);	 in	 the	 streets	 we	 walk	 arm	 in	 arm	 like	 the	 happiest	 of
engaged	couples;	we	say	“Du”	to	each	other	even	in	front	of	Dr.	Weiss
whom	we	happened	to	run	into;	my	picture,	as	F.	showed	me,	is	in	a
locket	 she	 was	 given	 in	 November;	 she	 claims	 she	 wouldn’t	 marry
anyone	else;	she	would	never	dispose	of	my	letters,	nor	wish	to	return
my	photographs,	nor	ask	for	hers	to	be	returned;	while	she	would	like
to	 go	 on	 writing,	 she	 would	 be	 equally	 willing	 to	 stop	 writing
altogether.—These	 revelations	 accompanied	 me	 during	 the	 night	 of
Saturday	to	Sunday,	and	on	my	return	journey.

Yours,	F.K.

[IN	 THE	 MARGIN	 OF	 THE	 THIRD	 PAGE]	 The	 letter	 to	Munich	 has	 of	 course	 been
mailed,	not	without	misgivings.

To	Grete	Bloch
March	3,	1914

Dear	Fräulein	Grete,	 the	natural-therapy	practitioner	 is	not	surprised
that	 you	 are	 suffering	 from	 headaches;	 the	 friend,	 however,	 is	 very
sorry.	 But	 leading	 the	 life	 you	 do,	 how	 is	 it	 possible	 to	 ward	 off
headaches,	 since	 you	 work	 so	 hard,	 rarely	 go	 out,	 never	 do	 any
exercises,	spend	the	evenings	lying	on	a	sofa,	and	then	exchange	it	for



your	 bed,	 sleep	 with	 your	 windows	 shut,	 leave	 the	 gaslight	 on	 at
night,	receive	tormenting	news	almost	daily	(as	you	once	wrote),	feel
yourself	abandoned	by	your	family	and	suffer	as	a	result	(F.,	who	has
been	 to	 see	 your	 family	 several	 times,	 told	 me	 that	 your	 mother
missed	you	and	would	be	happy	if	you	had	a	job	in	Berlin)—after	all,
even	 the	 soundest	 head	 can’t	 stand	 being	 assailed	 from	 all	 sides	 at
once.	On	my	advice	wouldn’t	you	adopt	a	vegetarian	diet	for	a	time	as
a	 first	 and	 very	 slight	 change	 in	 your	 mode	 of	 life?	 I	 really	 can’t
imagine	that	you	are	particularly	well	looked	after	in	that	minor	hell
of	 a	 pension	 which,	 incidentally,	 you	 see	 very	 objectively,	 thereby
rendering	it	rather	more	harmless.	Or	is	the	“brute”	such	a	wonderful
cook?	And	in	an	overtired	and	overworked	body	like	yours	(heavens
above,	in	the	office	till	11!),	meat	causes	nothing	but	devastation;	the
headaches	are	no	more	than	the	body’s	complaints	about	it.	Come	to
think	of	it,	on	Opolzer	Strasse,	near	the	Hofburg	Theater,	you	can	find
the	 best	 vegetarian	 restaurant	 I	 know.	 Clean,	 friendly,	 run	 by	 a
pleasant	family.	It	may	be	even	nearer	to	your	office	than	your	room
is,	 and	 I	 assume	you	 rush	back	 there	merely	 in	order	 to	have	 lunch
and	 rush	 off	 again.	 There	 is	 no	 doubt	 that	 eating	 en	 pension	 at	 the
Thalisia	 (that’s	 the	 name	 of	 the	 restaurant)	 is	 cheaper	 than	 at	 your
present	pension,	and	after	all	cheapness	does	matter	to	you,	since	(this
had	never	occurred	to	me	before;	how	can	you	be	expected	to	do	it?)
you	have	to	send	money	home	as	well.	But	I	have	no	doubt	that	the
food	is	much	better	there	and	that	you	will	enjoy	it	(though	perhaps
not	for	the	first	few	days),	that	you	will	feel	altogether	freer	and	more
robust,	that	you	will	sleep	better	and	moreover	in	the	dark,	and	that
you	will	be	 fresher	and	 I	hope	wake	up	without	a	headache.	 If	only
you	would	try	it.
(My	parents	have	come	to	sit	at	the	table,	I	can	no	longer	write	in
peace;	my	 father	 is	 breathing	 heavily	 through	 his	mouth,	 he	 is	 just
reading	 the	evening	paper	but	after	 that	he	 starts	his	usual	game	of
cards	with	my	mother,	 accompanied	 by	 exclamations,	 laughter,	 and
squabbling,	not	to	mention	whistling.)
The	 letter	 to	 Munich	 I	 mailed	 at	 once,	 but	 didn’t	 know	 if	 I	 was
doing	the	right	thing,	don’t	know	even	now.	Not	being	in	a	position	to
judge,	 I	 did	what	 you	 suggested.	 Surely	 a	meeting	 invariably	makes
for	clarity,	why	shouldn’t	this	one	have	done	so?	I	think	in	vain	about
the	connection	that	is	supposed	to	have	existed	between	you,	the	girl,
and	the	man.	Did	this	happen	in	Berlin?
On	Sunday	morning	when	you	were	writing	your	last	remarks	about



F.	 and	me,	F.	 and	 I	were	walking	 in	 the	Tiergarten.	Perhaps	at	 that
very	 moment	 F.	 was	 saying:	 “Please	 stop	 imploring	 me.	 You	 keep
wanting	the	impossible,”	or	perhaps	she	was	saying:	“That’s	the	way	it
is.	You	must	believe	it.	You	mustn’t	attach	importance	to	every	word,”
or:	“I	quite	like	you,	but	that	is	not	enough	for	marriage.	And	I	don’t
do	things	by	halves.”	To	which	I	replied:	“But	then	the	other	is	only	a
half,	 too,”	 to	 which	 F.	 said:	 “Yes,	 but	 it’s	 the	 bigger	 half.”	 But	 it’s
more	likely	that	while	you	were	writing	F.	said	nothing	whatever,	and
instead	 stared	 sullenly	 to	 one	 side	 and	 let	 me	 go	 on	 talking
irresponsibly	and	making	promises,	all	of	which	I	retracted	yesterday
in	a	letter.10
You	will	have	noticed	a	difference	between	my	card	from	Dresden
and	 yesterday’s	 letter.	 It	 can	 be	 explained	 by	 a	 sound	 and	 firm
resolution	 enabling	 me	 to	 go	 on	 living	 alone,	 without	 F.	 (at	 least
without	 F.	 as	 the	 main	 factor	 in	 my	 life),	 as	 long	 as	 is	 humanly
possible.	 Before	 this	 can	happen	 some	 time	will	 have	 to	 elapse;	 but
the	moment	something	comes	of	it	I	will	let	you	know.
What	 a	 pity	 you	 don’t	 come	 here	 on	 business	 some	 time.	 So	 the
exhibition	 is	 to	 be	 held,	 after	 all?	 I	 asked	 F.,	 but	 she	 knew	nothing
about	it,	merely	knew	of	an	exhibition	which	will	probably	be	held	in
Düsseldorf	next	year.
As	a	rule,	by	7	I	have	no	business	being	at	the	office	unless	I	have
been	 preoccupied	 with	 my	 own	 thoughts	 and	 done	 nothing	 all
morning,	or	if	I	want	to	take	a	day	off,	as	I	did	the	other	day.
If	my	signature	has	changed	recently	it	means	the	opposite	of	what
you	think,	or	rather	don’t	think,	merely	mention	jokingly.	I	don’t	like
to	 see	my	name	 in	writing,	and	automatically	assume	 that	 the	 same
applies	to	anyone	to	whom	I	feel	close.	What	is	contained	in	a	name	is
obvious	to	that	person.	Nevertheless:	Kindest	regards,	yours,

Franz	Kafka

To	Grete	Bloch
March	4,	1914

Dear	Fräulein	Grete,	I	don’t	know	if	I	shall	have	much	time	to	write,
someone	may	suddenly	come	to	fetch	me;	nevertheless	I	am	writing	at
once,	I	don’t	want	to	keep	you	waiting	unnecessarily	even	if	this	letter
contains	 nothing	 of	 importance,	 I	 don’t	want	 to	 cause	 you	 even	 the
faintest,	briefest	surprise	at	not	getting	an	answer,	you	are	too—let	us



say—too	important	to	me	for	that.	But	you	decide	(yes,	someone	has
just	 telephoned	 me,	 I	 shall	 have	 to	 stop	 soon)	 according	 to	 your
wishes	 the	 intervals	 at	 which	 we	 can	 write	 to	 each	 other	 quite
regularly	 from	 now	 on,	 irrespective	 of	 delaying	 moods	 and	 chance
happenings,	and	also,	of	course,	subject	to	imparting	important	news
before	the	appointed	time.	I,	for	my	part,	am	delighted	to	know	you,
but	 I	 believe	 this	 correspondence	 won’t	 do	 you	 any	 harm	 either,
especially	since	this	sadness	with	which	I	am	everlastingly	burdened,
and	which	up	to	now	I	have	invariably	thrust	upon	you,	may	after	all
come	to	an	end.	Think	for	example	how	long	it	took	me,	in	this	frame
of	mind,	to	recognize	you!	How	I	could	sit	beside	you	in	the	hotel	like
a	 regular	dried-out	 intriguer,	 only	half	 listening	 to	what	 you	had	 to
say!11
From	your	letter	I	can’t	tell	for	certain	whether	you	have	had	both

letters	I	wrote	since	my	visit	to	F.,	or	only	the	second	one,	and	this	is
why	I	am	not	sure	which	details	about	F.	you	know,	and	which	you
want	to	know.	F.’s	appearance	varies;	out	of	doors	she	generally	looks
very	 well,	 indoors	 sometimes	 tired	 and	 older,	 with	 rough,	 blotchy
skin.	Her	teeth,	all	of	them,	are	in	a	worse	condition	than	they	used	to
be,	each	one	has	a	 filling.	This	Monday	she	started	another	series	of
visits	to	the	dentist	who	is	making	new	gold	crowns	for	her.	All	 this
and	more	I	can	note,	see,	observe	carefully,	but	in	no	way	does	it	alter
my	feelings	for	F.
Her	 objections	 to	marrying	me	were	 uttered	 just	 as	 seriously	 as	 I

quoted	them	the	other	day,	with	the	possible	exception	of	the	remarks
about	 trains,	 theater	 seats,	 etc.,	 which	 were	 dropped	 casually,	 but
nevertheless	 directed	 specifically	 against	 me.	 No,	 I	 don’t	 consider
them	superficial	opinions,	I	can’t	say	that;	why	shouldn’t	they	be	well
founded?	 If	 I	 love	 the	whole,	 I	must	 love	 the	consequences,	 too;	the
fact	 that	 this	 sometimes	makes	one	want	 to	bare	one’s	 teeth	doesn’t
alter	anything.	But	you,	dear	Fräulein	Grete,	surely	you	should	know
F.	in	this	respect?
I	have	just	glanced	at	my	watch,	I	must	stop,	I	shall	answer	the	rest

of	your	letter	tomorrow.
Farewell,	and	please	go	on	being	a	good	friend	to

your	(how	shall	I	put	it?)	Franz	K.

who	 in	 recognition	 of	 the	 sun	 has	 but	 the	 icy	 coldness	 of	 his
room,	which	he	prefers	to	keep	to	himself.



To	Grete	Bloch
March	6,	1914

Dear	Fräulein	Grete,	this	is	good	news,	but	so	indefinite.	Granted,	as
long	as	there	was	no	question	of	your	trip	it	was	even	more	indefinite,
so	I	ought	to	be	content.	Do	come,	do	come	if	it	is	at	all	possible.	But
—if	it	were	to	be	for	one	afternoon	only,	and	no	more,	don’t	come	on
an	afternoon	such	as	this	when,	stiff	with	headaches	after	a	wretched
night,	 I	 spent	2	hours	 lying	on	 the	sofa,	hardly	knowing	what	 I	was
doing,	surely	a	sight	 to	scare	anyone	away.	On	the	other	hand—if	 it
were	 to	 be	 for	 a	 single	 afternoon	 only,	 come	 all	 the	 same,	 my
headaches	 will	 be	 gone,	 I	 shall	 be	 quite	 bearable,	 I	 shall	 be
unbearable	 only	 if	 you	don’t	 come.	You	will	 come,	 or	 you	wouldn’t
have	 filled	 me	 with	 such	 anticipation	 by	 your	 announcement,	 you
wouldn’t	have	done	that.
Now	that	I	know	you	are	coming	I	have	no	desire	to	write,	there’s
no	 point.	Where	 will	 your	 journey	 take	 you?	 Only	 to	 Bohemia?	 Or
really	 to	 Budapest	 as	 well?	 You	 will	 send	 me	 a	 postcard	 now	 and
then?	 All	 the	 same,	 for	 me	 the	 feeling	 that	 you	 will	 be	 traveling
(needless	to	say,	apart	from	the	fact	that	you	will	be	coming	here)	is	a
little	 uncanny;	 knowing	 you	 were	 in	 Vienna	 gave	 me	 a	 sense	 of
security,	you	were	always	accessible;	but	now	you	will	be	exposed	to
the	 uncertainties	 of	 a	 journey.	Have	 your	 headaches	 vanished?	 It	 is
not	enough	merely	to	thank	me	for	my	advice	without	at	least	giving
it	a	try.	 It’s	a	pity	that	the	vegetarian	restaurant	 in	Prague	is	so	bad
and	dirty	that	I	shan’t	be	able	to	take	you	there.
You	 have	 something	 to	 tell	 me,	 but	 have	 postponed	 it.	 Does	 this
mean	that	you	will	be	able	to	tell	me	at	all?	Well,	I	shall	expect	you	as
from	Monday.

Kindest	regards,	yours,	Franz	K.

Yes,	the	address:	Altstädter	Ring	6

To	Grete	Bloch
[March	7,	1914]

Dear	Fräulein	Grete,	so	now	again	you	are	not	coming!	You	oughtn’t
to	 have	 raised	 my	 hopes	 in	 order	 to	 disappoint	 them.	 Or	 are	 you
coming	to	Prague	after	all,	only	 later,	not	 till	after	Budapest?	Surely



someone	will	have	to	take	care	of	the	machines	here,	everything	is	in
a	terrible	muddle,	believe	me.
So	we	won’t	decide	on	the	timing	of	the	letters,	you	may	be	right.
However,	I	have	decided	on	this	negative	timing:	you	are	not	to	write
another	line	in	the	rush	before	your	departure	from	Vienna,	but	by	all
means	 a	 postcard	 immediately	 on	 your	 arrival	 in	Budapest.	 So	 your
trip	to	Budapest	is	coming	off,	after	all.
What	 you	 said	 about	 your	 family	 in	 your	 last	 letter	 but	 one	 still
keeps	going	around	in	my	head.	On	a	Sunday	afternoon	in	a	carriage
out	 in	 the	country	we	could	have	discussed	 it	quietly	and	at	 length;
today,	 indoors,	 with	 pains	 constantly	 simmering	 in	 the	 back	 of	 my
head,	I	can	say	only	a	few	words.	I	think	I	have	discovered	that	on	the
whole	 parents	 are	 more	 just	 to	 their	 children	 than	 the	 other	 way
around.	Parents	may	seem	to	be	unjust,	even	below	the	surface,	but
this	 is	 not	 so.	 As	 soon	 as	 irreconcilable	 differences	 (which	 always
exist,	 of	 course)	 are	 intensified	 by	 a	 particular	 situation,	 the	 first
reaction	 on	 both	 sides	 is	 one	 of	 pride.	 Parents	 know	 their	 children
thoroughly	and	 look	beyond	 them,	while	 children	 imagine	 that	 they
are	 in	 exactly	 the	 same	 position	 toward	 their	 parents.	 To	 humble
oneself	 is	 difficult,	 especially	 in	 such	 a	 clearly	 defined	 relationship,
but	it	is	not	entirely	decisive	for	this	relationship.	Only	the	moments
of	 extreme	 crisis	 are	 decisive,	 and	 it	 is	 then—as	 I	 have	 seen	 with
friends,	in	my	own	case	I	merely	sense	it—that	the	parents,	breaking
out	 of	 this	mixture	 of	 abomination,	 brutality,	 and	 cunning	 that	 has
been	 ascribed	 to	 them,	 step	 forth	 so	 spontaneously	 that	 one	 stands
there	 as	 though	 before	 a	miracle.	 There	 are	more,	 or	 at	 least	more
permanently,	 misunderstood	 parents	 than	 there	 are	 misunderstood
children.	Undoubtedly	you	attribute	to	yourself	some	guilt	in	relation
to	 your	 parents,	 for	 you	 say	 you	 are	 a	 reticent	 and	 unfriendly
daughter.	But	being	reticent	and	unfriendly	is	tantamount	to	refusing
to	face	the	situation,	to	refusing	to	be	just,	because	to	be	just	takes	a
lifetime,	and	that	is	hardly	long	enough.	But	I	do	admit	that	it	may	be
impossible	to	be	just	toward	one’s	parents;	I	at	least	am	incapable	of
it;	but	however	difficult	one’s	own	case	may	be,	one	should	be	able	to
feel	the	possibility	of	loving.—Do	you	know	the	enclosed	story	[“The
Judgment”]?	It	is	an	offprint	from	a	yearbook	[Arkadia],	take	it	along
on	your	journey.	Perhaps	you	will	like	it	better	than	“The	Stoker.”
I	can’t	give	you	any	specific	information	about	F.’s	attitude	toward
you.	 Where	 she	 is	 concerned,	 my	 critical	 faculties	 have	 become	 so
feeble	 that	 every	 opinion	 strikes	me	 as	 equally	 wrong.	 Actually	 we



talked	 very	 little	 about	 you,	 for—I	 repeat—in	 the	 7	 hours	 or	 so	we
spent	together	F.,	at	least	as	far	as	I	remember,	hardly	ever	finished	a
sentence.	She	seemed	neither	noticeably	close	to	you,	nor	noticeably
distant.	While	writing	this,	it	occurs	to	me	that	the	frame	of	mind	she
was	in	can’t	have	been	normal.—She	seemed	a	little	disturbed	by	the
absence	of	news	 from	you.	Once,	 in	Dr.	Weiss’s	company	(when	she
happened	to	be	lively	and	very	friendly	toward	me),	she	said	jokingly
(I	 had	 been	 telling	 them	 that	 you	 had	 very	much	 liked	 the	Galley):
“Frl.	Bloch	seems	to	mean	a	great	deal	to	you.”	I	could	only	answer	in
the	 affirmative.	 I	 can	 really	 say	 nothing	 about	 F.’s	 attitude	 toward
you,	less	even	than	about	her	attitude	toward	me.

Yours,	Franz	K.

To	Grete	Bloch
March	9,	1914

Dear	Fräulein	Grete,	I	can’t	penetrate	your	frame	of	mind	sufficiently
to	 understand	 why	 you	 write	 a	 sentence	 like:	 “I	 am	 sick	 to	 death”
when	referring	 to	your	work.	When	 it	 is	your	work	 that	affords	you
complete	independence	from

Best	wishes	Felix
my	small	nephew	has	just	been	here,	I	let	him	add	his	good	wishes	to
you;	 perhaps	 this	 innocence	 has	 greater	 powers	 of	 wishing	 and
greeting	than	my	quivering	head

both	Berlin	and	Munich,	 the	 two	sides	which	 threaten	 it	most—this,
surely,	ought	to	make	it	worth	while,	whatever	else	it	may	entail.	And
what’s	more,	 it	 is	 full	of	prospects;	you	yourself	mentioned	 that	you
were	 thinking	 of	 going	 eventually	 to	 England	 or	America,	 and	 your
office	writing	paper	 is	headed	by	a	 list	of	 the	most	desirable	branch
offices,	 with	 only	 one	 exception;	 this,	 the	 very	 one	 you	 are	 in	 at
present,	 alas,	 seems	undesirable	not	 only	on	account	of	 the	 city	but
also	on	account	of	your	superiors.	The	monotony	of	your	work	(which
in	 Berlin	 doesn’t	 appear	 to	 have	 been	 quite	 as	 crushing)	 does	 not
strike	 me	 as	 too	 great	 a	 price	 to	 pay	 for	 your	 independence	 and
freedom	and	the	sense	of	well-being	that	goes	with	them.	My	advice
on	 this	 subject	 is	 and	 always	 will	 be:	 get	 out	 of	 Vienna.	 If	 it	 is
impossible	to	open	at	least	a	subsidiary,	if	not	a	full	branch	office	in



Prague,	with	you	in	charge	(from	the	business	point	of	view	it	seems
absurd	not	to	exploit	a	commercial	area	such	as	Bohemia),	wouldn’t	it
be	better	to	go	direct	to,	say,	Frankfurt?	Moreover,	I	hardly	think	that
any	 additional	 experience	 you	may	 gain	 in	Vienna	will	 be	 useful	 to
you	 in	 the	 future,	 although,	 or	 perhaps	 just	 because,	 business	 in
Vienna	 is	 more	 difficult	 than	 elsewhere.	 And	 yet	 it	 seems	 that	 you
intend	to	establish	yourself	in	Vienna	for	some	time	to	come.
Incidentally:	 is	 it	 from	your	desk,	 or	 from	your	 chief’s	 room,	 that
the	Postal	Savings	Bank	building	can	be	seen?	If	I	am	not	mistaken	it
was	built	by	Otto	Wagner12	 and	at	one	 time	much	admired.	For	my
part,	 I	 can	well	 imagine	what	a	depressing	 sight	an	obtrusively	 self-
conscious	 building	 of	 this	 kind	 must	 offer.	 There	 seems	 to	 be	 no
ending	to	paragraphs	other	than:	get	out	of	Vienna.
The	 only	 objection	 I	 have	 to	 our	meeting	 at	 Easter	 is	 that	 it	 is	 4
weeks	 hence.	 But	 if	 I	 am	 to	 talk	 about	 the	 future,	 I	 must	 be	 quite
frank.	 This	 is	 how	 it	 should	 be,	 for	 I	 don’t	 want	 to	 have	 even
temporary	secrets	from	you,	but	then	you	mustn’t	talk	about	fears	for
our	friendship	which	have	no	deeper	justification	than	all	fears	for	all
things	human.	No,	dear	Fräulein	Grete,	we	won’t	mention	this	again.
However,	my	situation	is	as	follows:	last	Monday	I	wrote	a	letter	to	F.
—it	 seems	 silly,	 but	 I	 just	 cannot	 get	 it	 onto	 paper.	 Had	 I	 had	 the
opportunity	on	Sunday,	 I	would	gladly	have	 told	you	all	 about	 it	 in
person;	now	I	ask	you	to	give	me	another	2	or	3	days,	by	which	time
it	will	have	resolved	itself	anyway;	it	isn’t	even	so	much	a	question	of
F.,	 but	 of	 me	 and	 of	 the	 resolution	 that	 I	 have	mentioned	 already.
Anyway,	if	I	am	in	Prague	at	Easter	we	must	meet,	either	in	Vienna,
in	Prague,	or,	and	this	might	be	best	of	all,	somewhere	halfway,	in	the
Bohemian	Forest,	perhaps.	Please	don’t	hold	it	against	me,	in	no	way
against	me,	 that	 I	 didn’t	 complete	 the	 above	 sentence;	 it	makes	me
quite	 unhappy	 enough,	 for	 it	 shows	 how	 much	 I	 have	 still	 to
overcome	within	myself	before	I	can	carry	out	my	resolution.	The	one
good	thing	is	that	it	will	have	to	be	decided	very	soon.

Kindest	regards,	yours,	Franz	K.

To	Grete	Bloch
March	12	[probably	11],	1914

Dear	Fräulein	Grete,	it	would	have	been	a	good	thing,	after	all,	if	we
had	decided	on	set	times	for	our	letters.	In	that	case	I	wouldn’t	have



ever-recurring	thoughts,	horrid	thoughts	that	for	some	reason	you	are
cross	with	me,	 for	 some	reason	 think	you	ought	not	 to	write	 to	me,
whereas	 undoubtedly	 there	 is	 no	 reason	 for	 your	 not	 writing	 other
than	that	you	are	overworked	at	the	office,	or	may	even	have	gone	to
Budapest.
The	 other	 day	 I	 didn’t	 tell	 you	 even	 the	most	 important	 things	 I
meant	to	say	about	your	last	letter;	I	didn’t	feel	like	going	on	after	the
failure	with	myself	that	I	experienced	at	the	end	of	that	letter.	Could
you	have	been	disconcerted	by	its	ending?	You	may	not	yet	realize	as
I	 do	 that	 although	 our	 respective	 relationships	 with	 F.	 cannot	 be
eliminated—for	 that	 they	 are	 too	 strong,	 perhaps	 indissoluble—they
at	 least	 no	 longer	 form	 the	 most	 important	 part	 in	 our	 own
relationship;	so	 that	 I	may	well	pass	 the	whole	affair	over	 in	silence
when	words	 fail	me,	 but	 that	 this	 should	 not	 prevent	 the	 hands	we
held	out	 to	each	other	 in	 friendship	 from	being	clasped	as	 firmly	as
ever.	To	me	the	situation	with	F.	is	so	unclear,	or	rather,	somewhere
so	deep	down	that	my	eyes	can	hardly	reach	it,	so	terribly	clear	that
with	 every	word	 I	 say	 it	 becomes	 even	more	 obscure,	more	 turbid,
more	 agonizing.	 But	 now	 I	 hope	 the	 days	 before	 reaching	 the
conclusion	can	be	counted	on	one	hand.
[Presumably	the	continuation	of	this	letter]
Please,	in	no	circumstances	come	to	Prague	for	the	day	on	a	Sunday,
in	 order	 to	 leave	 again	 in	 the	 evening,	 don’t	 even	 think	 of	 it;	 how
could	I	possibly	bear	to	see	you	under	such	a	strain,	you	who	are	not
short	of	strains	as	it	is.	On	the	other	hand	it	might	be	possible,	since
you	 stop	 work	 at	 3	 on	 Saturday,	 if	 you	 felt	 like	 it	 one	 day	 before
Easter,	 for	 both	 of	 us	 to	 set	 off	 and	 meet	 somewhere	 halfway	 one
Saturday	evening	and	spend	Sunday	together.	Would	you	like	that?	I
would	love	it.	Do	write	and	tell	me.	Then	we	can	study	the	timetables
and	find	a	nice	place.

Kindest	regards,	yours,	Franz	K.

Are	you	reading	Countess	Thürheim?

To	Grete	Bloch
March	12,	1914

Dear	Fräulein	Grete,	only	a	few	words:	today	I	had	a	letter	from	F.	(I
am	 ashamed	 to	 say	 by	 what	 means	 I	 extracted	 it;	 if	 the	 forces	 I



employed	could	be	concentrated,	 the	sun	could	be	plucked	 from	the
heavens);	 perhaps	 it	 doesn’t	 explain	 everything,	 but	 a	 great	 deal,
including	 F.’s	 attitude	 toward	 you.	 F.’s	 family	 has	 suffered	 a	 great
misfortune;	 her	 letter	 gives	 no	 details	 except	 that	 yesterday	 her
brother	 sailed	 for	 America.	 I	 don’t	 know	 whether	 this	 is	 a	 secret,
surely	not	 so	 far	as	you	are	concerned.	The	misfortune	may	be	very
grave;	my	first	selfish	reaction	was	to	see	it	as	my	good	fortune,	since
for	 the	 first	 time	 for	 ages,	 for	6	months	or	 so,	 I	 once	again	heard	a
human	note	in	F.’s	voice.	If	only	the	means	I	employed	to	achieve	this
hadn’t	been	quite	so	shameful!
Perhaps	I	shall	have	some	news	of	you	tomorrow.	You	are	not	angry

with	me,	you	mustn’t	be;	it	wasn’t	you	who	reduced	me	to	silence	at
the	end	of	my	last	letter	but	one,	it	was	merely	the	paper.
Incidentally,	today	I	suggested	to	F.	that	we	should	meet	tomorrow

evening	 in	Dresden;	 I	 ought	 to	have	 a	 telegram	with	her	 answer	by
tomorrow	morning.

Kindest	regards,	yours,	Franz	K.

March	13,	1914
You	are	unhappy,	F.,	and	I	upset	you.	That	is	my	misfortune.	To	be	a
comfort	to	you,	if	only	a	small	comfort,	that	would	be	my	joy.	But	this
I	cannot	be.	You	distinguish	between	my	relationship	with	you	on	the
one	hand,	and	the	misfortune	in	your	family	on	the	other,	as	though
they	 were	 two	 entirely	 different	 things,	 the	 former	 being	 of	 minor
importance.	 If	 this	 is	what	you	do,	 then	that	 is	how	it	 is,	or	at	 least
appears	to	be,	for	in	this	respect	I	don’t	want	to	say	anything	definite;
that	is	for	you	to	do,	F.
I	don’t	know	how	many	 times	 I	have	read	your	 two	 letters.	There

are	good	things	in	them,	certainly;	but	also	much	that	is	sad,	and	most
of	it	is	a	mixture,	neither	pleasant	nor	sad.	Your	telegram	today	makes
everything	 a	 little	 more	 obscure,	 or—to	 borrow	 from	 you	 a	 word
without	which	I	cannot	get	along—more	bitter.	It	was	not	particularly
wise	of	me,	perhaps	not	particularly	tactful	either,	to	ask	you	to	come
to	Dresden	 tomorrow,	 since	now,	during	 the	 first	 few	days	after	 the
misfortune,	 you	 have	 to	 be	 on	 hand	 for	 your	 parents.	 If	 I	 made	 a
mistake,	 then	 the	 7	 words	 in	 your	 telegram	 are	 sufficient
punishment.13	 But	 perhaps	 it	 was	 not	 so	 much	 a	 mistake	 as	 my
inability	to	differentiate,	as	you	do,	between	your	family’s	misfortune



and	myself.
Let	 us	 forget	 about	 it,	 F.;	 but	 what	 is	 to	 happen	 now?	 On	 no
account,	 F.,	 on	 no	 account	 are	 you	 to	 cast	 me	 back	 into	 the
uncertainty	from	which	yesterday’s	letters	enabled	me	to	emerge	by	at
least	 an	 inch.	On	no	 account	 are	 you	 to	 do	 it,	 I	 am	not	 going	 back
there	again;	I	would	willingly	sacrifice	all	the	good	in	me	and	escape
with	 the	 rest,	 no	matter	 where.	 However,	 if	 we	mean	 to	make	 any
progress	we	shall	certainly	have	 to	 talk	 to	each	other;	no	doubt	you
think	so	too,	F.,	don’t	you?	And	surely	the	place	where	this	could	be
done	 most	 easily,	 conveniently,	 freely,	 and	 fully,	 is	 Dresden.	 You
yourself	 suggested	 it	 casually	 the	 other	 day	 in	 Berlin,	 and	 have
mentioned	it	on	several	occasions	before.	There	is	no	serious	obstacle
to	prevent	it,	so	are	you	prepared	to	do	it	next	Saturday?	Lately	you
have	been	unable	to	write,	and	even	now	it	is	still	torture	to	you,	and
this	 to	 some	 extent	 I	 understand,	 which	 is	 an	 additional	 reason	 in
favor	 of	 meeting.	 But	 please,	 Felice,	 don’t	 postpone	 it	 beyond	 next
Sunday.	Imagine	I	am	a	stranger	who	has	seen	you	but	once	in	Prague
and	now	asks	you	a	favor,	which	to	you	is	a	mere	nothing,	and	to	him
is	the	one	thing	that	matters.	You	would	not	refuse	him.	What	foolish
words!	You	would	see	the	necessity	for	a	meeting	even	without	them.
But	if	you	don’t	and	can	think	of	something	that,	in	your	opinion,	is
better,	then	tell	me;	I	shall	comply	provided	it	helps	to	get	us	out	of
this	 predicament;	 anything	 that	 achieves	 this	 can	 only	 be	 good.
Indeed,	I	could	come	to	Berlin,	but	apart	from	the	fact	that	it	certainly
would	not	be	as	propitious	as	Dresden—I	am	afraid	to	come	to	Berlin
as	 long	 as	 things	 between	 us	 are	 not	 clear,	 I	 am	 afraid	 of	 the	 very
sight	of	the	first	suburbs,	I	am	afraid	of	the	station	platform	where	I
craned	my	 neck,	 I	 am	 afraid	 of	 the	 entrance	 to	 the	 station	where	 I
stood	 scanning	 approaching	 automobiles,	 I	 am	 afraid	 of	 everything.
Not	now!	Come	to	Dresden!	Let	me	be	happy	to	suffer	your	suffering,
instead	of	my	own	all	alone.

Franz

I	forgot	to	tell	you,	my	mother	was	delighted	with	your	letter,	it
was	quite	unnecessary	to	put	 in	a	good	word	for	you;	she	sends
you	 affectionate	 greetings,	 she	 wanted	 to	 answer	 at	 once,	 I
begged	her	to	leave	it	for	the	time	being.	Now	the	most	important
thing	 is	 that	we,	above	all	 that	you,	get	 things	clear.	 In	 this	my
mother	could	only	confuse	you;	 let	us	hope	she	has	not	done	so



already	in	her	first	letter.
Franz

To	Grete	Bloch
March	13,	1914

Dear	 Fräulein	 Grete,	 if	 your	 last	 letter	 had	 arrived	 the	 day	 before
yesterday	I	could	easily	have	invalidated	its	 first	section,	which	tries
to	discourage	me	without	knowing	my	decision;	today	after	F.’s	letter
and	today’s	telegram:	“impossible	to	come	to	Dresden	regards	Felice”
I	can’t,	at	least	not	just	now,	though	in	principle	it	would	be	possible
even	 today.	But	 no	 riddles;	 I	 shall	 be	 delighted	 to	 be	 allowed	 to	 sit
opposite	you,	to	talk	to	you,	listen	to	you,	go	for	a	walk	with	you.	(By
the	way,	how	often	have	 I	 imagined	you	 lying	out	of	breath	on	 the
checked	featherbed	at	the	school	caretaker’s	home!	Even	in	those	days
Frl.	 Grete	 was	 a	 little	 perplexed	 but	 recovered	 and	 has	 improved
steadily,	 though	she	 refuses	 to	believe	 it.)	Well,	 tomorrow’s	meeting
with	 F.	 could	 not	 be	 arranged;	 if	 it’s	 possible	 to	 arrange	 a	meeting
with	her	for	the	following	Sunday,	but	only	in	that	case,	would	you,
dear	 Fräulein	Grete,	 postpone	our	meeting	until	 the	 Sunday	 after?	 I
have	already	studied	the	timetables.	Wouldn’t	you	be	interested	to	see
Gmünd?14	It	is	exactly	halfway,	the	trains	practically	meet	there,	both
of	 us,	 you	 and	 I,	 leave	 home	 at	 around	 4	 and	 arrive	 at	 Gmünd	 at
about	 7,	 I	 not	 till	 7:30.	 The	 following	 evening	 we	 take	 the	 same,
merely	 reversed,	 trains	 back	 home.	 I	 consider	 this	 excellent,	 apart
from	the	fact	that	I	inflict	as	long	a	journey	upon	you	as	upon	myself.
Perhaps	we	can	still	 find	a	place	as	suitable	but	nearer	Vienna.	Now
it’s	your	turn!
That	you	imagine	you	oughtn’t	 to	write	to	me	may	be	 justified	by
your	way	of	thinking,	but	it	doesn’t	do	me	credit,	nor	does	it	reassure
me.	To	listen	to	a	tale	of	suffering	and	to	experience	suffering	are	two
different	 things,	however	much	 listening	may	 force	one	 to	 share	 the
experience	 in	any	particular	case.	 In	a	moment	of	great	desperation,
however,	 one	 can	 transform	 suffering	 into	 a	privilege,	 of	which	 one
must	 remain	 worthy;	 but	 trust	 placed	 in	 one	 by	 a	 suffering	 human
being	 to	whom	one	also	 feels	close	 is	always	a	privilege	and	even	a
consolation.
Am	I	not	right	in	what	I	say	about	Vienna,	isn’t	it	confirmed	by	the
row	 you	 had	 with	 that	 employee?	 Yet	 somehow	 you	 seem	 to	 be



captivated	 by	 Vienna,	 although	 you	 don’t	 yet	 know	what	 is	 best	 in
Vienna,	 for	 it	 looks	 as	 though	 you	 still	 haven’t	 read	 the	 Countess
Thürheim.	 Incidentally,	 do	 you	 know	 “The	 Poor	 Musician”	 by
Grillparzer?	Haven’t	I	asked	you	this	before?	Until	you	have	read	that
as	well	as	Grillparzer’s	autobiography,	and	perhaps	his	 travel	diaries
from	Germany,	France,	and	England,	there	may	not	be	much	point	in
going	 to	 see	 the	 Grillparzer	 Room	 at	 the	 Städtische	 Museum,	 but
when	you	have,	I	would	be	glad	if	you	went	and	then	wrote	and	told
me	about	it.	You	are	not	to	leave	Vienna	until	you	have	done	this,	but
then,	hurry	away.

Kindest	regards,	yours,	Franz	K.

Has	anything	unusual	happened	in	the	last	few	days	to	make	you
so	dejected?

To	Grete	Bloch
March	16,	1914

Dear	Fräulein	Grete,	if	you	prefer	to	think	that	your	last	letter	got	lost
because	 it	 said	 that	 you	 couldn’t	write	 to	me	because	 you	were	 too
miserable,	 then	 let	 that	 part	 of	 the	 letter	 be	 lost,	 but	 otherwise	 this
had	 better	 not	 happen.	 Letters	 should	 be	 lost	 internally	 as	 rarely	 as
they	are	by	the	post	office.

But	I’ve	been	badly	held	up,	and	it’s	 late.	So	now	only	what	matters
most,	even	if	this	consists	precisely	of	those	things	one	thinks	of	only
when	there	is	plenty	of	time.
Dear	Fräulein	Grete,	you	misunderstood	my	“I	hope”;	it	referred	to
the	necessity	of	a	definite	 conclusion,	not	 to	 the	kind	of	 conclusion.
For	the	moment,	however,	even	this	hope	has	not	been	fulfilled;	one
letter	has	already	 remained	unanswered,	 the	 second	one	will	not	be
answered	tomorrow,	and	so	it	will	continue,	but	hardly	for	long.	Now,
of	course,	my	attitude	to	it	is	not	quite	what	it	used	to	be,	and	yet—
no,	we	won’t	talk	about	this	now.
My	 impression	 of	 her	 brother	 is	 quite	 similar	 to	what	 you	 imply,
and	F.	loves	him	so	much	and	was	proud	of	him,	at	least	I	think	she
was.	But	this	you	will	know	better	than	I—what	a	tragedy	it	must	be
to	have	to	follow	such	a	person	with	one’s	love!
One	thing	that	occurred	to	me	during	the	last	day	or	two:	now	that



her	brother	has	proved	an	utter	failure,	won’t	F.	have	to	(or	anyway
think	she	has	to)	keep	or	at	least	largely	support	her	parents?	Do	you
know	anything	about	this?	Her	father	is	old	and	won’t	be	able	to	go
on	working	much	 longer;	 perhaps	 he	 has	 also	 had	 to	 take	 over	 his
son’s	liabilities	in	some	way—don’t	you	think	this	may	be	a	possible
explanation	 (not	 the	 only	 one,	 by	 no	means	 the	 only	 one!)	 for	 F.’s
behavior?	 This	 would	 be	 an	 obstacle	 which	 I	 cannot	 regard	 as
insuperable	 at	 present,	 but	 which	 would	 become	 altogether
insuperable	if	and	for	as	long	as	it	is	kept	secret.
Enough	for	today,	it’s	too	late	and	I	want	to	mail	the	letter	in	order
to	 prevent	 you	 from	 abandoning	 yourself	 to	 false—and	 to	 me
annoying—feelings	of	relief	at	the	loss	of	letters.

Kindest	regards,	yours,	Franz	K.

March	17,	1914
No,	F.,	at	 this	 time	you	must	not	go	on	owing	me	a	 reply,	now	 less
than	 ever	 before.	Again	 I	 am	without	 an	 answer	 to	 two	 letters,	 two
letters	to	which	the	answers	were	obvious,	the	one	answer	at	least—
that	we	must	meet	and	talk	to	each	other	frankly.	And	with	trust,	such
as	I	have	always	had	in	you,	and	you	far	too	rarely	in	me.	There	may
be	 reasons	 for	 your	 not	 answering,	 you	 would	 not—at	 least	 that	 is
what	you	wrote—torment	me	or	yourself	capriciously.	None	of	these
reasons,	 however,	 can	 hold	 out	 to	 the	 end;	 they	 are	 but	 pretexts,
ghosts.	Speak,	F.,	 let	me	get	near	these	ghosts.	What	you	said	in	the
Tiergarten	about	your	inadequate	affection	for	me	may	have	been	true
then,	and	may	still	be	true;	but	other	things	were	not	true,	as	has	now
become	apparent,	at	 least	your	silence	was	not	true.	Now	at	 last,	F.,
do	try	to	see	what	I	am,	and	what	I	have	become	through	my	love	for
you.

Franz

To	Grete	Bloch
March	18,	1914

Dear	Fräulein	Grete,	no	retaliations,	anything	but	that!	Don’t	worry,	I
will	write	 to	 the	 office.	 There	were	 various	 reasons	why	 I	 preferred
writing	to	the	pension,	among	them	the	fact	that	my	first	office	letter
remained	unanswered,	 and	 from	 this	 I	 concluded	 that,	 in	 the	office,



letters	are	read	in	a	worse	humor,	which	is	certainly	true.	Besides,	in
my	 first	 office	 letter	 I	 advised	 you	 so	 energetically	 (energy	 utterly
wasted,	by	 the	way)	 to	 leave	Vienna	 that	 subsequently	 I	was	afraid,
supposing	someone	else	had	opened	the	letter,	that	I	might	have	been
taken	 for	 a	 rival	 firm	 trying	 to	 snap	 up	 Frl.	 Bloch,	 which	 wouldn’t
appear	so	very	improbable,	after	all.
That	 you	 confirm	 my	 assumption	 with	 regard	 to	 F.	 helps	 me	 to
understand	 certain	 things	 hitherto	 incomprehensible.	 According	 to
you,	however,	provided	there	are	no	further	consequences	as	a	result
of	 her	 brother’s	 departure,	 the	 family’s	 situation	 can’t	 have
deteriorated	very	seriously,	since	he	hadn’t	done	much	to	improve	it.
But	 the	 idea	 of	 the	 trainfare	 having	 prevented	 F.	 from	 coming	 to
Dresden	is	an	explanation	altogether	too	well	disposed	toward	me;	no,
dear	 Fräulein	 Grete,	 you	 don’t	 seriously	 believe	 that,	 either.	 The
trainfare	 in	any	case	cannot	prevent	F.	 from	writing	to	say	she	can’t
come,	and	in	fact	by	now	it	isn’t	just	one	letter,	nor	two,	but	soon	it
will	 be	 3	 letters	 that	 haven’t	 been	 answered.	 Nor,	 indeed,	 is	 her
mother	 a	 serious	 obstacle;	 F.	 herself	 has	 on	 occasion	mentioned	 the
possibility	of	a	meeting	in	Dresden.	No,	no,	it’s	not	that.
However,	I	am	now	most	anxious	to	meet	F.	in	order	to	get	things
as	 clear	 and	 to	 be	 as	 free	 as	 possible	 to	 decide—F.’s	 letter	 which	 I
mentioned	to	you	offers	me	a	far	better	chance	to	do	this	than	I	had
before.	So	an	hour	ago	I	sent	her	a	telegram	asking	if	it	would	be	all
right	if	I	came	to	Berlin	on	Saturday.	By	means	of	telegrams	one	can
extract	telegrams	from	her	more	easily	than	anything	else.
But	if	I	don’t	go	to	Berlin	and	you	don’t	have	to	go	to	Budapest,	we
will	meet	in	Gmünd,	won’t	we?	I	definitely	deserve	that	Sunday,	not
from	your	point	of	view,	perhaps,	but	surely	as	viewed	from	on	High.
Just	see	by	the	enclosed15	how	well	we	are	going	to	be	looked	after	in
future.
Your	visitor	on	Monday,	was	that	an	important	visit?	Did	he	cheer
you	up	a	little?	At	about	the	time	you	were	writing	that	letter	I	must
have	got	out	of	bed	to	shut	a	window,	for	the	gale	shook	the	walls	of
my	room.	It	didn’t	wake	me	up,	for	I	wasn’t	asleep,	but	I	wanted	to	be
quiet.	 Then	 somewhere	 along	 the	 hall,	 or	 perhaps	 merely	 in	 my
drowsy	consciousness,	some	far-distant	door	kept	banging.
You	no	 longer	mention	your	headaches;	does	 this	mean	 they	have
been	 driven	 out	 by	 means	 of	 a	 strict	 vegetarian	 diet?	 This	 gives
profound	 pleasure	 to	 your	 natural-therapy	 enthusiast	 who	 is	 so
seldom	free	of	headaches,



Franz	K.

March	18,	1914
It	is	9	P.M.	Had	you	sent	a	telegram	at	once	this	afternoon	in	reply	to
mine,	it	should	in	normal	circumstances	have	arrived	by	now.	I	have
no	idea	whether	you	are	at	the	office	or	at	home,	you	don’t	consider
me	worthy	of	a	single	word.	I	didn’t	want	to	send	a	telegram	to	your
home,	as	it	might	alarm	your	parents;	but	I	shall	have	no	alternative.	I
must	 try	and	 find	you	wherever	you	are;	 that	 is	my	duty	 to	myself,
and	 maybe	 even	 toward	 you.	 You	 will	 understand,	 F.—if	 only	 this
understanding	 had	 already	 been	 reached!	 Today	 I	 sent	 a	 telegram
saying:	 “If	 you	 don’t	 come	 to	 Dresden	 I	 shall	 come	 to	 Berlin	 on
Saturday.	Do	you	agree?	Will	you	be	at	the	station?”
That	was	my	 telegram.	 I	have	now	repeated	 it	and	 in	one	way	or
another	I	shall	go	on	repeating	it.

Franz

Franz	Kafka’s	mother	to	Felice	Bauer
[LETTERHEAD:	Hermann	Kafka,	Fancy	Goods]

March	18,	1914
Dear	Fräulein	Bauer,
I	am	in	receipt	of	your	kind	letter	and	will	write	to	you	next	week.
Today	I	am	just	putting	these	few	lines	on	paper	to	ask	you	to	answer
Franz’s	letters	by	return,	for	I	can	see	how	upsetting	your	silence	is	to
him.	 He	 must	 not	 know	 about	 this	 letter	 which	 I	 am	 sending	 you
today.

With	kind	regards,	Julie	Kafka

To	Grete	Bloch
[March	19,	1914]

Dear	Fräulein	Grete,	I	am	certainly	not	asking	you	not	to	want	to	see
me	 this	Saturday;	 there	 is	no	need	 to	ask,	 for	 I	know	very	well	 that
this	journey	to	Gmünd	would	be	nothing	but	a	sacrifice	on	your	part
—on	the	other	hand,	though	this	Sunday	is	to	be	abandoned,	I	ask	you
not	to	abandon	altogether	the	idea	of	a	meeting,	the	mere	anticipation
of	 which	 has	 given	 me	 more	 pleasure	 than	 anything	 else	 for	 some



time.	 I	 want	 to	 present	 to	 you	 a	 decent	 and	 more	 or	 less	 mature
person,	 not	 the	 kind	 of	 person	 I	 am	 at	 present,	 the	 one	 whose
beginnings	 (but	 only	 the	 beginnings!)	 you	 saw	 during	 your	 visit	 to
Prague.	Believe	it	or	not,	I	didn’t	get	an	answer	to	my	telegram,	nor	to
my	 fourth	 letter	 (since	 Saturday).	 Your	 last	 letter	 suggests	 that	 you
don’t	quite	understand	why	 I	want	 to	 talk	 to	F.	Perhaps	what	 I	 said
about	F.’s	 last	 letter	wasn’t	quite	clear.	The	 reason	 is	 that	 this	 letter
was	perhaps	not	quite,	but	very	much	like	a	letter	from	the	good	days,
almost	 the	complete	opposite	of	all	 that	has	 taken	place	between	us
lately.	Which	 is	 why	 it	 came	 as	 such	 a	 shock	 and	 now,	 what	 with
writing	and	waiting,	it	 is	 like	being	thrown	back	into	the	very	worst
days.
Incidentally,	I	am	writing	to	her	parents	today,	it	has	to	be	brought
to	an	end,	good	or	bad.

Kindest	regards,	yours,	Franz	K.

To	Felice	Bauer’s	parents
March	19,	1914

Dear	Herr	and	Frau	Bauer,
If,	in	the	intolerable	situation	in	which	I	now	find	myself,	I	write	to
ask	 you	 for	 news,	 I	 am	 of	 course	 in	 no	 way	 referring	 to	 your	 last
extremely	 kind	 letter	 which,	 in	my	 seemingly	 outrageous	 fashion,	 I
still	have	not	answered.	This	is	not	the	time	to	talk	about	it,	nor	do	I
know	 whether	 I	 may	 do	 so.	 At	 that	 time,	 however,	 you	 did	 not
consider	me	entirely	unworthy	of	Felice;	on	this,	then,	may	I	now	base
my	 hope	when	 asking	 you	 to	meet	my	 request	 for	 news,	 very	 brief
news,	with	regard	to	Felice?
The	last	news	I	received	from	Felice	was	on	Saturday.	Since	then	I
have	 sent	 four	 letters	and	one	 telegram,	 some	 to	 the	office,	 some	 to
the	 apartment,	 all	 have	 remained	 unanswered.	 Not	 the	 slightest
reason	 for	 this	 silence	 can	 be	 found	 in	 our	 most	 recent
correspondence;	 on	 the	 contrary,	 after	what	 had	 been	 said,	 answers
seemed	an	inevitable	necessity.	As	a	result	I	can	merely	think	about	it
day	and	night	and	imagine	either	that	Felice	is	ill,	or	that	some	other
serious	trouble	has	befallen	her	since	Saturday.
Should	 these	 misgivings	 be	 justified,	 and	 should	 you	 in	 fact	 be
prepared	 to	 meet	 my	 request,	 then	 I	 beg	 you	 to	 send	 me	 a	 brief
telegram.	 As	 from	 noon	 tomorrow	 I	 shall	 do	 nothing	 but	 wait	 for



news,	which	is	all	I	have	been	capable	of	doing	for	a	long	time.
Yours	respectfully,	Dr.	Franz	Kafka	Prague,	Alstädter	Ring	6

March	21,	1914
The	 fact	 that	 mere	 accidents	 intervene	 to	 confuse	 our	 situation
unnecessarily,	 that	 my	 telegram	 should	 arrive	 at	 your	 office	 on	 an
afternoon	 when	 you	 are	 not	 there,	 that	 your	 telegram	 should	 be
incorrectly	addressed,	and	finally,	as	I	now	see,	the	fact	that	my	letter
to	 your	 parents	 should	 be	 delayed	 by	 one	 day	 (it	 was	 mailed	 on
Thursday	as	the	enclosed	receipt	shows)—all	this	 is	bad	enough,	but
things	 between	 us	 have	 reached	 such	 a	 point	 that	 even	 the	 gravest
accident	cannot	make	things	worse.
Today	on	 receiving	notification	of	 your	 telephone	 call	 I	 could	not
very	well	 leave	the	office,	and	anyway	couldn’t	wait	to	hear	as	soon
as	possible	what	it	was	you	wanted;	besides,	with	unreasonable	hope	I
thought	you	might	be	telephoning	in	order	to	rob	your	express	letter
of	some	of	its	acrimony—which	is	why	I	asked	for	the	call	to	be	put
through	to	the	Institute.	That	was	a	mistake;	we	haven’t	got	a	booth;
there	 are	 always	 a	 lot	 of	 people	 hanging	 about	 in	 the	 president’s
anteroom	 where	 the	 telephone	 is,	 and	 as	 it	 happened	 one	 of	 the
directors,	 a	 tiresome	man,	was	 standing	behind	me	cracking	 jokes;	 I
could	have	kicked	him.	As	a	result	I	couldn’t	hear	properly,	but	above
all	 for	 quite	 some	 time	 I	 couldn’t	 even	 take	 in	 the	meaning	of	 your
words.	After	all,	I	had	reason	to	assume	that	my	letter	to	your	parents
had	 arrived	 the	 day	 before,	 that	 you	 had	 known	 about	 it	 before
sending	 your	 telegram	 and	 of	 course	 before	 writing	 your	 letter	 as
well.	Thus,	on	the	telephone,	apart	from	the	fact	that	I	couldn’t	hear
properly,	I	couldn’t	help	wondering	what	it	was	you	wanted,	and	why
in	fact	you	had	called	me.	Moreover	with	the	sound	of	your	voice—
and	 this,	 after	 all,	 is	 why	 I	 am	 afraid	 of	 the	 telephone—that
passionate	 longing	 to	 see	 you	 came	 over	 me	 again;	 the	 simplest
method	for	clarifying	everything	and	having	everything	clarified,	was
to	 come;	 so	 I	 said	 I	 am	 coming	 to	 Berlin.	 Forcing	myself	 to	 ignore
every	 objection,	 to	 ignore	 the	 hesitations	 in	 your	 reply,	 ignore	 the
grudging	 manner	 with	 which	 you	 agreed	 to	 be	 at	 the	 station,	 I
entirely	forgot	what	there	was	to	answer	in	your	letter	received	today
—and	said:	I	am	coming.	I	hurried	out	of	the	office,	dashed	to	and	fro
in	the	rain,	thought	it	over,	everything	seemed	so	utterly	hopeless,	the



outward	journey	I	would	have	accepted	gladly,	but	was	so	terrified	of
the	return	journey	that	I	could	not	make	up	my	mind	to	go.	When	I
got	 home	 and	 found	 your	 father’s	 telegram:	 “Felice	well	 your	 letter
just	received	Felice	tells	me	she	wrote	yesterday,”	I	soon	decided	not
to	 go.	 I	 realized	 that	 your	 parents	 hadn’t	 received	 my	 letter	 until
today,	knew	why	you	had	telephoned,	knew	that	everything	you	said
—including	what	I	hadn’t	heard—had	been	some	kind	of	reproach	for
my	having	written	to	your	parents,	recalled	your	angry	words	in	the
Tiergarten	when	in	face	of	your	continued	semisilences	I	said	I	would
approach	 your	 father	 in	 order	 to	 get	 things	 clear—and	 so	 I	 decided
not	 to	go.	 I	have	 sent	you	a	 telegram	to	 the	office,	and	one	 to	your
father,	thanking	him.
Whatever	 I	 may	 say	 next,	 Felice,	 I	 do	 fully	 realize	 that	 a	 great,
though	to	me	still	inexplicable,	misfortune	has	befallen	you	and	your
family;	 I	 realize	 you	 are	 torn	 madly	 this	 way	 and	 that,	 and	 I	 also
realize	that	you	bear	it	the	way	it	had	to	be	borne	by	the	kind	of	girl	I
love	you	for	being.	In	everything	I	say,	I	am	aware	of	this.
Today	 when	 I	 had	 read	 your	 express	 letter	 once,	 ten	 times,	 and
more,	 it	 seemed	 as	 though	 you	 had	 not	 read	my	 last	 letters	 at	 all.
Indeed	 it	 is	 hard	 to	 believe	 that	 you	have	 read	 the	 last	 four	 or	 five
letters	 since	Saturday;	how	else	would	 it	have	been	possible	 for	you
not	to	have	answered	a	single	word,	and	how	else	would	it	have	been
possible	for	you—knowing	I	had	been	without	an	answer	to	so	many
letters	 as	 well	 as	 a	 telegram—to	 reproach	 me	 when,	 in	 a	 constant
state	of	worry	about	you,	I	finally	wrote	to	your	parents	(you	hadn’t
given	 me	 your	 sister’s	 address)	 to	 find	 out	 how	 you	 are.	 (Besides,
during	 your	 penultimate	 period	 of	 silence	 I	 also	wrote	 to	 say	 that	 I
would	 ask	 your	 father,	 and,	 after	 all,	 there	was	 less	 reason	 for	 this
present	 silence	 than	 for	 any	 other;	 indeed	 it	 was	 wholly
incomprehensible,	 nor	did	 you	make	 the	 least	 attempt	 to	 explain	 it.
Nor	can	I	understand	why	you	thought	of	answering,	and	finally	did
answer,	my	 telegram,	whereas	 the	 4	 or	 5	 letters	which	 showed	my
frame	of	mind	far	more	clearly	were	simply	laid	aside.)	However,	it	is
not	those	letters	I	am	thinking	of	now,	rather	of	the	letter	I	wrote	on
my	 return	 from	 Berlin	 in	 which	 I	 announced	 my	 mother’s	 letter,
which	 you	 could	 not	 have	 read	 either.	 Surely	 you	 don’t	 imagine,
Felice,	that	I	would	let	my	mother	write	so	as	to	win	my	wife	for	me
(if	the	merest	suspicion	of	any	such	hope	was	lodged	somewhere	in	a
corner	 of	 my	 infernal	 head,	 I	 am	 not	 responsible	 for	 it);	 I	 let	 my
mother	write	 so	as	 to	get	direct	 from	you	confirmation	of	what	you



had	said	to	me	in	the	Tiergarten.	I	may	yet	tell	you	in	this	very	letter
why	I	allowed	my	mother	to	do	so.
Today	you	write:	“Let	us	draw	a	line	right	through	those	discussions
in	the	Tiergarten.”	That	would	be	good,	I	can	think	of	nothing	better;
but	 on	 the	 very	next	 page	 you	 say:	 “You	 told	me	you	were	 content
with	the	love	I	have	for	you.”	Surely	nothing	could	obliterate	that	line
more	thoroughly.	Felice,	don’t	you	realize	that	if	in	my	desperation	I
ever	said	anything	of	the	kind,	I	could	never	ultimately	accept	it	from
you.	In	simple	words	what	you	mean	is	merely	that	you	are	prepared
to	 sacrifice	 yourself	 because	 you	 realize	 “I	 cannot	 do	without	 you.”
Am	 I	 to	 accept	 human	 sacrifices,	 the	 sacrifice,	 moreover,	 of	 the
dearest	of	human	beings?	Surely	you	would	be	bound	to	hate	me	if	I
did,	but	not	only	 that:	 if	what	you	say	 in	your	 letter	 is	 strictly	 true,
then	you	must	hate	me	already.	Surely	you	are	bound	to	hate	the	one
whom	you	do	not	 love	enough	 to	be	able	 to	 share	his	 life	willingly,
but	who	by	some	means	(and	were	these	means	no	more	than	his	love
for	you)	can	 force	you	to	share	his	 life.	Your	 last	 letter	but	one	was
friendly;	 I	 could	 see	 you	were	 profoundly	 distressed;	 your	words	 in
the	Tiergarten	seemed	to	be	words	spoken	in	distress;	when	uttering
those	 words	 you	 thought	 of	 nothing	 but	 your	 own	 misery;	 in	 your
letter	you	gave	me	hope,	indefinite,	but	all	the	sweeter	to	imagine.	In
this	letter	there	is	definite	hope,	but	first	the	blow	on	the	head.
Moreover,	 two	 further	 ambiguities	 are	 to	 be	 found	 in	 your	 last
letter;	 in	 them	 I	 see	 the	 last	 and	 slenderest	 chance	 for	 my	 all	 but
undying	hope.	You	are	still	unhappy,	still	 incapable	of	deciding,	and
besides	you	admit	(in	this	case,	however,	an	admission	is	superfluous)
that	 you	 did	 not	 “tell	me	 all”	 in	 the	 Tiergarten.	 I	would	 be	 able	 to
cling	to	these	two	ambiguities	if	only	the	rest	of	the	letter	weren’t	so
clear!	How	I	 long	 to!	Do	 tell	me,	Felice:	Why	do	you	 force	yourself,
why	do	you	try	to	force	yourself?	What	has	changed	since	our	walk	in
the	Tiergarten?	Nothing;	 indeed	you	say	so.	Then	what	has	changed
with	you	since	our	good	days?	Everything;	this	you	also	say.	So	why
do	you	want	to	sacrifice	yourself,	why?	Don’t	keep	asking	whether	I
want	you!	It	makes	me	abysmally	sad	to	read	these	questions.	 I	 find
these	questions	in	your	letter,	yet	not	a	word,	not	a	single	word	about
yourself,	not	a	word	about	what	you	expect	for	yourself,	not	a	word
about	what	marriage	would	mean	to	you.	It	all	fits	in,	for	you	it	is	a
sacrifice,	hence	there	is	no	more	to	be	said	about	it.
I	would	quite	definitely	have	been	incapable	of	telling	you	to	your
face	 what	 I	 have	 just	 written;	 it	 would	 have	 been	 easier	 for	me	 to



prostrate	myself	before	you	and	hold	on	to	you	forever.	So	it’s	a	good
thing	I	didn’t	go.
You	ask	about	my	plans;	I	don’t	quite	know	what	you	mean	by	that,

but	 I	 think	 I	 can	 tell	you	about	 them	quite	openly	now.	When	 I	got
back	from	Riva	I	had	decided	for	various	reasons	to	give	notice.	For
the	past	year	or	more	I	have	known	there	was	no	sense,	no	real	sense,
in	keeping	my	job	unless	I	married	you	(since	we	met,	there	has	not
been,	and	will	not	be,	anyone	else).	If	I	did,	my	job	would	make	sense,
would	become	almost	desirable.	(I	imparted	something	of	the	kind	to
Dr.	 Weiss	 and,	 as	 you	 heard	 in	 the	 coffeehouse,	 he	 now	 positively
insists	upon	 it.)	 If	 I	don’t	marry	you,	 then	 this	 job—however	easy	 it
may	be	(exceptional	occasions	apart)—will	become	loathsome	to	me,
since	 I	 earn	 more	 than	 I	 need,	 and	 that’s	 pointless.	 There	 are	 a
number	of	other	things	that	I’d	rather	not	talk	about	after	all.	All	this	I
mentioned	to	my	mother	for	the	first	time	on	my	return	from	Berlin.
She	seemed	to	understand	it	all	fairly	well,	but	asked	to	be	allowed	to
write	 to	you	 first;	 perhaps	 she	understood	 it	 so	well	 simply	because
she	didn’t	believe	what	I	told	her	about	you,	and	pinned	great	hopes
on	her	letter	to	you.	So	now	you	know	why	I	allowed	my	mother	to
write	to	you.
Well,	Felice?	I	feel	almost	as	though	I	were	on	the	platform	at	the

Anhalt	 station,	 that	 for	 once	 you	 had	 come	 to	meet	me,	 that	 I	 had
your	 face	 before	 me	 and	 was	 meant	 to	 be	 saying	 goodbye	 to	 you
forever.—On	Monday	 I	 shall	 still	expect	an	express	 letter,	a	miracle,
how	do	I	know	what	I	expect.	After	Tuesday	I	shall	no	longer	expect
anything.

Franz

To	Grete	Bloch
March	20	[presumably	21],	1914

Dear	Fräulein	Grete,	there	are	only	a	few	minutes	left	if	I	am	to	mail
this	letter	today.	Another	letter	has	been	at	your	office	since	Friday.	I
didn’t	 write	 on	 Friday	 because	 I	 was	 too	 distracted.	 Today	 was
supposed	 to	 be	 the	 decisive	 day.	Well,	 it	was	 decisive.	 Today,	 after
waiting	 in	 vain	 for	 a	week,	 I	 had	 in	 all	 3	 telegrams,	 one	 telephone
call,	 and	 an	 express	 letter	 from	 Berlin.	 By	 afternoon	 I	 was	 almost
ready	to	set	off	to	the	station.	The	outcome	of	all	this	is	that	today	I
wrote	 a	 long	 letter	 to	F.—possibly,	 probably	my	 last.	The	 candor	of



F.’s	 letter	 today	was	 almost	 complete.	 But	 let	 us	 discuss	 this	 at	 our
next	 meeting.	 It	 simply	 cannot	 be	 put	 on	 paper.	 I	 derived	 more
pleasure	from	your	brief	postcard	than	from	anything	I	received	from
Berlin.	 You	 are—I	 am	 about	 to	 say	 something	 immensely	 stupid,	 or
rather	what	I	am	going	to	say	isn’t	stupid,	but	the	fact	that	I	say	it	is—
well,	you	are	the	best,	kindest,	and	sweetest	creature.
And	 so	 is	 F.,	 certainly;	 this	will	 remain	my	 opinion	 forever	 and	 I
shall	 never	 abandon	 it—this	 is	 equally	 certain.	 She	 just	 can’t	 help
behaving	 like	 this	 toward	 me	 and	 we	 must	 resign	 ourselves	 to	 it.
Perhaps	the	force	that	ties	me	to	her	and	that	which	keeps	her	away
from	me	are	one	and	the	same.	There	is	really	nothing	to	be	done.

Kindest	regards,	yours,	Franz	K.

To	Grete	Bloch
March	22,	1914

Dear	 Fräulein	 Grete	 and	 Child	 of	 Spring,	 out	 on	 the	 Ring	 a	 huge,
never-ending	funeral	procession	is	passing,	one	of	the	windows	in	my
room	is	open,	my	sister	and	a	cousin	are	leaning	out	of	it,	I	have	been
trying	 to	drag	 them	both	back	 in	by	 their	 skirts	but	 I	 can’t,	 so	 I	am
sitting	 here	 freezing.	 (As	 if	 this	weren’t	 enough,	my	 cousin	 has	 just
exclaimed:	 “Do	 let’s	 sing	 something!”	 And	 they	 promptly	 begin	 to
sing.)	No,	I	can’t	write	now.

There	is	a	letter	for	you	in	Vienna,	though	not	with	good	wishes,	for
how	could	I	know	that	you	are	a	child	of	spring	when	your	thoughts
are	 so	 often	 those	 of	 sad	 seasons.	 On	 the	 whole,	 though,	 it	 does
somehow	suit	you.
It’s	awful	how	you	get	dragged	from	pillar	to	post.	First	to	Troppau,
then	to	Budapest,	but	never	to	Prague.	Which	reminds	me,	will	you	go
and	see	F.’s	sister?
In	the	letter	I	sent	to	Vienna	I	said	that	in	reply	to	an	express	letter
from	F.	I	wrote	her	a	long	letter—probably	my	last.	To	this	I	add	that
tomorrow,	 Monday,	 is	 the	 final	 and	 probably	 quite	 pointless	 time
limit.	If	by	tomorrow,	Monday,	I	don’t	get	some	utterly	inconceivable
letter	 from	 F.	 (inconceivable	 after	 the	 last	 letter	 and	 the	 telephone
conversation,	also	on	Saturday,	a	telephone	call	from	F.),	then	we,	F.
and	I,	are	free.	Only	F.,	however,	will	be	able	to	enjoy	this	freedom	at
once	and	thoroughly;	I	too	may	be	able	to,	one	day,	to	some	extent.	If



I	find	I	can’t,	so	much	the	worse	for	me.
You	received	so	many	letters	and	telegrams?	So	you	do	have	a	great
many	 friends	 and	 acquaintances,	 after	 all?	 And	 the	 “desired
quarters”?	 Don’t	 certain	 misunderstandings	 flow	 back	 and	 forth
between	 them	 and	 you	 which	 cannot	 be	 cleared	 up	 by	 one	 who	 is
totally	 involved	 in	 them,	 but	 which	 could	 either	 produce	 the	 good
wishes	 or	 else	 dispose	 of	 the	 “desired.”	And	perhaps	 you	would	 tell
me	some	time	what	your	mother,	for	example,	wrote	to	you	on	your
birthday?	Everything	was	“sweet	and	kind,”	according	 to	you.	Quite
innocently	I	may	be	to	blame	for	the	fact	that	F.	never	wrote	to	you;
on	 that	 very	 Friday,	 after	 she	 had	 a	 wrongly	 addressed	 telegram
returned	 as	 undeliverable,	 she	 sent	me	 another,	 then	wrote	 a	 letter;
she	is	also	very	busy,	as	well	as	worried	about	her	brother	from	whom
there	has	been	no	news	as	yet;	“how	nervous	and	worn	out	I	am”	is
how	 this	 letter	begins,	and	 in	 the	 same	vein	did	 the	earlier	one;	 it’s
high	 time	that	 the	whip	which,	on	 top	of	everything,	 I	 represent	 for
her,	were	withdrawn	at	last.
Well,	 you	 are	 certainly	 traveling	 enough	now,	possibly	more	 than
you	want	to,	and	certainly	more	than	is	good	for	you.	I	won’t	let	you
go	 to	 Gmünd	 as	 well.	 But	 if	 you	 are	 in	 Vienna	 at	 Easter	 and	 not
expecting	some	other	visitor,	I	shall	probably	come.

Kindest	regards,	yours,	Franz	K.

March	25,	1914
Dearest	F.,	in	your	last	letter	(how	long	have	I	sat	motionless	over	that
word,	wishing	you	were	here!)	there	is	a	sentence	that	is	fairly	clear
to	 me	 from	 every	 angle;	 this	 hasn’t	 happened	 for	 a	 long	 time.	 It
concerns	the	apprehensions	you	feel	about	sharing	life	with	me.	You
don’t	think—or	perhaps	you	merely	wonder	whether,	or	perhaps	you
merely	want	to	hear	my	views	about	it—that	in	me	you	will	find	the
vital	support	you	undoubtedly	need.	There	is	nothing	straightforward
I	can	say	to	that.	 I	may	also	be	too	tired	just	now	(I	had	to	wait	for
your	 telegram	 until	 5	 P.M.	 Why?	 What’s	 more,	 contrary	 to	 your
promise,	I	had	to	wait	as	long	as	24	hours	for	your	letter.	Why?)	and
far	beneath	my	tiredness	too	happy	about	your	letter.

It	 is	 late	 evening.	 I	 won’t	 be	 able	 to	 write	 of	 the	 most	 important
matters	today.	The	exact	information	you	want	about	me,	dearest	F.,	I



cannot	give	you;	I	can	give	it	you,	if	at	all,	only	when	running	along
behind	 you	 in	 the	Tiergarten,	 you	 always	 on	 the	 point	 of	 vanishing
altogether,	 and	 I	on	 the	point	of	prostrating	myself;	only	when	 thus
humiliated,	more	deeply	than	any	dog,	am	I	able	to	do	it.	When	you
pose	that	question	now	I	can	only	say:	I	love	you,	F.,	to	the	limits	of
my	strength,	in	this	respect	you	can	trust	me	entirely.	But	for	the	rest,
F.,	 I	 do	 not	 know	myself	 completely.	 Surprises	 and	disappointments
about	myself	follow	each	other	in	endless	succession.	What	I	hope	is
that	 these	 surprises	 and	 disappointments	will	 be	mine	 alone;	 I	 shall
use	all	my	strength	to	see	that	none	but	the	pleasant,	the	pleasantest
surprises	of	my	nature	will	touch	you;	I	can	vouch	for	this,	but	what	I
cannot	vouch	for	is	that	I	shall	always	succeed.	How	could	I	vouch	for
that	 in	 view	 of	 the	 bewildering	 confusion	 in	 my	 letters	 which	 you
have	been	receiving	from	me	all	this	time?	We	haven’t	been	together
much,	it’s	true,	but	even	if	we	had	been	together	a	great	deal,	I	would
have	asked	you	(for	what	would	then	have	been	impossible	to	do)	to
judge	 me	 by	 my	 letters	 and	 not	 by	 your	 personal	 experience.	 The
potentialities	latent	in	my	letters	are	equally	latent	in	me,	the	bad	as
well	as	the	good;	personal	experience	robs	one	of	perspective,	and	in
my	particular	case	to	my	disadvantage.	You	need	only	recall	some	of
my	letters	to	admit	that	this,	this	at	any	rate,	is	not	the	way	for	me	to
persuade	you.
Moreover,	 I	 believe	 that	 this	 immaturity	 of	 mine,	 these	 possibly
happy,	 possibly	 unhappy	 fluctuations	 of	 my	 nature,	 need	 not	 be	 in
any	way	decisive	 for	your	 future	happiness	with	me;	you	needn’t	be
directly	exposed	to	their	effects.	You	are	not	dependent	on	others,	F.;
you	may	 long	to,	or	rather	you	certainly	 long	to	become	dependent;
but	you	would	hardly	give	in	to	that	kind	of	longing	indefinitely.	You
couldn’t	do	it.
To	 your	 final	 question,	 however,	whether	 it	 is	 possible	 for	me	 to
take	you	as	though	nothing	had	happened,	I	can	only	say	that	it	is	not
possible.	But	what	is	possible,	and	in	fact	necessary,	is	for	me	to	take
you	with	all	that	has	happened,	and	to	hold	on	to	you	to	the	point	of
delirium.

Enclosed:
One	thing	you	must	take	into	account,	F.:	my	situation	is	quite	unlike
yours.	 If	 we	 were	 to	 part,	 or	 perhaps	 I	 might	 now	 say	 “if	 we	 had
parted,”	you	could,	would	have	to,	or	at	any	rate	would,	carry	on	with
your	present	way	of	life	for	the	time	being.	I	could	not	do	so	with	my



way	of	life;	I	have	quite	definitely	reached	a	dead	end.	I	am	not	likely
ever	 to	 forget	 that	 it	was	you	who	made	me	realize	 this.16	Never	 in
my	life	have	I	had	such	definite	signs	to	prove	the	absolute	need	for
decision.	I	must	tear	myself	out	of	my	present	life	either	by	marrying
you,	 or	 by	 giving	 notice	 and	 going	 away.	 Had	 your	 telegram	 not
reached	 me	 on	 Monday,	 then	 possibly	 on	 Tuesday,	 but	 anyway	 by
Wednesday	I	would	have	sent	off	an	already	prepared	 letter	which	I
had	 reason	 to	 hope	 would	 procure	 for	 me	 a	 minor	 job	 with	 some
financial	support	in	Berlin;	besides,	I	would	have	tried,	without	much
ambition	 in	 that	 direction,	 to	 get	my	 foot	 in	 on	 the	 lowest	 rung	 of
journalism.	I	would	have	succeeded,	of	this	there	is	no	doubt.	But	that
I	should	have	succeeded	in	forgetting	you	and	the	lost	opportunity	of
marrying	you	(it	would,	in	all	probability,	have	been	lost	for	years	at
least)—this	I	don’t	believe.
I	must	close,	or	my	letter	won’t	catch	the	mail,	and	I	cannot	keep
you	 waiting	 for	 my	 letters	 since	 I	 keep	 imagining	 myself	 sitting	 at
your	 table	waiting	 (which,	of	 course,	 is	quite	wrong).	But	 I	 shall	be
writing	again	in	reply	to	your	last	letter.	But	please	do	write	at	once,	if
only	a	few	lines.	Don’t	keep	me	waiting!	Look,	F.,	if	you	want	to	marry
me,	 don’t	 allow	 your	 future	 husband’s	 heart	 to	 have	 a	 spasm	 each
time	the	mail	is	due	and	for	a	long	time	after.
You	 say	 I	 ought	 to	 come	 to	Berlin,	 but	 surely	 you	do	 realize	 that
before	I	see	your	parents	we	will	have	to	talk—I	to	you	as	well	as	you
to	 me.	 Surely	 this	 is	 absolutely	 essential.	 Would	 it	 really	 not	 be
possible	 this	 Sunday	 in	 Dresden?	 Your	 arguments	 against	 are	 valid,
but	so	are	mine	in	favor.	And	after	all,	you	of	your	own	accord	have
several	times	in	the	past,	and	even	the	other	day	in	Berlin,	proposed	a
meeting	 in	 Dresden.	 You	 must	 at	 least	 have	 had	 some	 idea	 of	 the
possible	arrangements	you	could	make.	Try	it,	F.,	and	anyway	write	to
me	soon.

Franz

On	Monday	 I	got	a	postcard:	“Muzzi	Braun17	wishes	you	a	very
good	day.”	It	wasn’t	timed	quite	right:	your	telegram	didn’t	arrive
until	the	evening.

To	Grete	Bloch
March	26,	1914



Dear	Fräulein	Grete,	I	am	afraid	it	is	very	doubtful	that	this	letter	will
find	you	still	in	Budapest.	Your	postcard	took	more	than	two	days,	it’s
now	Thursday—in	short,	I	am	writing	to	Vienna	and	welcome	you	on
the	table	in	your	room.	It’s	nice,	too,	to	wait	until	the	door	opens	and
the	weary	traveler	comes	in.
I	don’t	know	whether	it	was	as	a	result	of	Muzzi’s	wish,	but	in	any
case	F.’s	and	my	affair	has	taken	a	slight	turn	for	the	better.	Did	I	tell
you	about	Monday’s	time	limit?	I	think	so.	Well,	there	was	nothing	for
a	 long	 time,	 it	was	 already	5	o’clock,	 I	was	beginning	 to	 feel	 like	 a
man	who	has	been	granted	his	freedom,	in	the	good	as	well	as	the	bad
sense,	 when	 a	 telegram	 arrived	 announcing	 a	 letter	 for	 Tuesday.
Tuesday	came,	but	no	letter,	F.	never	tires	of	keeping	me	waiting.	On
Wednesday	the	letter	arrived,	not	a	bad	letter;	this	may	be	a	new	and
good	beginning.
But	now,	dear	Fräulein	Grete,	I	should	like	to	hear	something	about
you	 again.	What	was	 it	 like,	 the	 beginning	 of	 the	new	year	 of	 your
life?	The	Hungarian	beginning,	 is	 it	pleasant?	How	are	you	standing
up	 to	 all	 the	 hard	work?	 I	 am	 thinking	 of	 Countess	 Thürheim,	who
was	 also	 in	 Budapest.	 (“Buda	 is	 an	 accumulation	 of	 tasteless	 and
unsightly	houses,	with	the	exception	of	the	fortress	which	is	a	city	in
itself.	 Pest	 is	 rather	 better,	 but	 crawling	 with	 Jews	 and	 a	 meeting
place	for	tradesmen.	The	streets	are	wide,	there	are	even	a	number	of
pretty	 houses,	 but	 one	 meets	 many	 more	 animals	 than	 people.	 I
reckon	that	one-third	of	the	population	consists	of	bullocks	and	pigs.”)
She,	 too,	worked	hard	 there	 (Volume	 I,	164),	but	on	 the	whole	was
discontented.	 Since	 by	 chance,	 dear	 Fräulein	 Grete,	 I	 once	 brought
you	 and	 the	 Countess	 together	 and	 now	 think	 of	 the	 two	 of	 you	 as
one,	I	doubt	that	you	liked	Budapest	very	much.	I	hope	soon	to	hear
what	it	was	like.

Kindest	regards,	yours,	Franz	K.

To	Grete	Bloch
March	28,	1914

Dear	Fräulein	Grete,	only	a	 few	words	 today	and	my	 thanks	 for	not
having	 forgotten	 about	 me	 even	 in	 Budapest.	 I	 have	 only	 a	 few
moments,	spent	the	whole	afternoon	running	around	with	an	old	lady
from	 ancient	 Halberstadt18	 and	 now	 feel	 if	 possible	 more	 forsaken
than	the	dog	and	the	parrot	who	sit	waiting	for	this	lady	in	7	rooms	in



Halberstadt.	Not	that	I	feel	forsaken	by	this	lady,	not	that	at	all.
There	is	nothing	new	to	report	about	myself	if	this	in	itself	were	not

news.	Not	a	word	from	F.
Kindest	regards,	yours,	Franz	K.

Did	the	letter	reach	you	in	Budapest?

To	Grete	Bloch
March	31,	1914

Dear	Fräulein	Grete,	what’s	happened?	Whichever	way	I	work	it	out,	I
really	should	have	had	news	of	you	from	Vienna	by	today.	Could	you
have	stayed	in	Budapest	till	Sunday,	or	is	it	that	you	are	overtired	and
ill,	or	angry	with	me,	perhaps?	But	if	you	are	angry	about	something,
it	would	be	only	 right	 if	you	wrote	all	 the	more	quickly	 in	order	 to
give	me	 a	 chance	 to	 apologize	 as	 soon	 as	 possible.	 As	 it	 is,	 I	 don’t
know	anything,	just	sit	wondering	and	worrying,	the	more	so	since	I
know	that	you	would	surely	have	written	to	me	had	you	been	able	to
write.
Kindest	regards	for	all	possible	eventualities,

yours,	Franz	K.
April	3,	1914

You	don’t	understand	my	telegram,	F.?	I	assume	it	wasn’t	garbled.	It
should	read:	“Could	not	answer	last	letter.	Had	to	say	to	myself	your
sole	desire	is	to	humiliate	me.	What	else	could	your	last	letter	mean,
what	else	was	the	meaning	of	the	otherwise	pointless,	never	explained
intervals	between	your	letters.”
(Strangely	enough,	yesterday’s	telegram,	though	it	appears	to	have

been	handed	in	at	noon,	arrived	very	late.	I	was	still	at	home	at	8	P.M.,
the	 telegram	hadn’t	arrived.	Then	 I	went	out	and	didn’t	 return	until
12:30,	when	I	found	your	telegram.)
So	you	don’t	understand	 the	 telegram?	Recall	our	 last	meeting,	F.

Surely	 no	 human	 being	 can	 ever	 have	 been	 more	 profoundly
humiliated	 at	 the	 hands	 of	 another	 than	 I	 was	 on	 that	 occasion	 by
you,	though	certainly	no	one	could	have	asked	for	it	more	than	I	did.
The	 humiliation	 did	 not	 lie	 in	 your	 rejection	 of	 me;	 that	 was	 your
indisputable	right.	The	humiliation	lay	in	the	fact	that	either	you	did
not	answer	at	all,	or	else	left	the	few	answers	you	did	give	completely



vague,	merely	revealing	a	dull	hatred	and	antagonism	which	was	so
terribly	 convincing	 that	 even	 the	 memory	 of	 our	 good	 times	 was
affected	by	it;	and	I	remembered	certain	incidents	that	could	easily	be
interpreted	in	the	light	of	your	present	attitude	toward	me.	You	said
little,	but	of	the	little	you	said	a	lot	still	rings	word-perfect	in	my	ear.
You	spoke	of	the	possibility	(the	possibility!)	of	your	love	for	someone
of	the	past	whom	you	did	not	wish	to	talk	about;	you	said	you	could
never	do	things	by	halves	and	that	not	marrying	me	(I	argued	that	this
too	was	a	half-measure	since	you	allege	that	I	am	not	wholly	strange
to	you)	was	the	greater	half,	that	you	would	be	unable	to	put	up	with
my	 idiosyncrasies,	 that	 I	 must	 finally	 and	 for	 heaven’s	 sake	 stop
asking	for	the	impossible,	that	if	it	so	pleased	me	our	correspondence
could	cease,	but	you	were	also	prepared	to	continue	it	(yet	I	knew	as
well	 as	 you	 did	 that	 you	wouldn’t	 answer	my	 letters,	 which	 is	 just
what	 happened),	 and	 there	 were	 many	more	 such	 things.	 If	 I	 have
forgotten	 some	of	 them,	 they	can	be	deduced	 from	my	 replies.	As	a
matter	of	fact,	these	replies	also	prove	the	acts	of	meanness	of	which	I
am	capable.	I	was	untrue	to	myself;	I	asked	whether	you	minded	my
being	 a	 vegetarian,	whether	 you	 could	marry	me	without	 love,	 and
finally	I	even	had	the	audacity	to	mention	the	factory.
It	should	be	unnecessary	to	repeat	all	this,	especially	since	you	were
in	an	exceptional,	though	to	me	still	undisclosed,	predicament	at	the
time.	But	you	say	you	don’t	understand	my	telegram.—My	first	letter
(since	Berlin)	revoked	most	of	what	I	had	said,	insofar	as	it	is	possible
and	 permissible	 to	 revoke	 one’s	 own	 words.	 My	 humiliations
continued;	 if	 in	 the	 Tiergarten	 you	 kept	 orally	 silent,	 you	 now	kept
silent	 in	 writing;	 even	 my	 mother’s	 letter	 you	 failed	 to	 answer
promptly.	But	there	was	an	explanation:	you	had	had	so	much	worry.
Yet	even	when	the	worst	of	this	was	over,	you	kept	silent	for	weeks,
left	 5	 letters	 unanswered.	 Wasn’t	 this	 contempt?	 Nor	 with	 a	 single
word	did	you	explain	this	silence,	although	you	knew	how	it	made	me
suffer.	Wasn’t	 this	even	worse	 than	 the	Tiergarten?	Once	you	wrote:
“If	 you	 are	 satisfied	 with	 my	 love,	 well	 and	 good.”	 Even	 in	 the
Tiergarten	 you	 didn’t	 say	 anything	 of	 the	 kind.	 Once	 you	 wrote:
“Everything	 I	 said	 in	Berlin	was	 true,	 true	 in	 itself,	 although	 it	may
not	 have	 been	 everything.”	 But	 I	 have	 never	 been	 told	 what	 this
“everything”	is.
It	should	be	unnecessary	to	mention	this	too,	Felice;	for	then	came	a
letter,	 the	 last	 but	 one,	 that	 seemed	 to	 put	 everything	 right.	 All
seemed	well,	a	definite	promise	of	better	days	seemed	to	have	arrived.



Joyously	I	wrote	back,	 I	appealed,	perhaps	urgently	as	never	before,
not	 to	be	kept	waiting	 for	an	answer,	 told	you	how,	with	an	aching
heart,	I	manage	to	survive	the	fruitless	hours	of	waiting	for	the	mail,
appealed	 for	 just	 a	 few	 lines,	 if	 that	 was	 all	 you	 could	 do,	 for	 the
following	day—and	waited	four	days.	And	then	what	did	I	get?	Then	I
got	your	last	letter,	a	few	lines	scribbled	in	a	restaurant	after	a	meal,
no	explanation	 for	 the	absence	of	 a	 reply,	 the	 trip	 to	Dresden	 (your
prior	willingness	to	undertake	this	trip	not	explained)	simply	rejected,
your	 sister’s	 whispered	 suggestion	 to	 be	 brief	 (briefer	 still!	 briefer
still!).	 That	was	 all.	Could	 I	 contemplate	 a	 reply,	 let	 alone	 anything
else,	when	 in	 the	 course	of	 four	days	one	moment	 after	 lunch	 is	 all
you	could	spare	for	me,	when	not	a	word	was	said	in	response	to	the
contents	of	my	 letters,	and	 the	whole	 thing	was	 just	 reluctantly	and
casually	 fitted	 into	 the	 pattern	 of	 your	 life!	Didn’t	 this	 revive	 it	 all,
starting	with	 the	 first	 step	 in	 the	 Tiergarten?	 Could	 I	 possibly	 have
answered?	Now	do	you	see	that	I	couldn’t?
If,	F.,	following	this	explanation,	which	is	meant	to	explain	not	only
me	 but	 you	 as	well,	 you	 think	 I	 should	 come,	 then	 of	 course	 I	will
come	at	 once.	 I	would	 come	 tomorrow,	 Saturday,	 at	 10:30	 P.M.,	and
would	have	to	leave	at	4:30	in	the	afternoon,	as	on	Monday,	like	most
days	at	present,	I	have	some	difficult	and	tiresome	work	to	do.	If	you
want	me	to	come,	and	if	you	would	meet	me	at	the	station	(I	would
merely	 escort	 you	 home,	 you	 could	 be	 there	 at	 11:30),	 then	 send	 a
telegram	 at	 once	 so	 that	 it	 arrives	 by	 noon,	 and	 I	will	 hurry	 to	 the
station.

Franz

To	Grete	Bloch
[UPPER	HALF	OF	THE	PAGE	MISSING]

[April	3	or	4,	1914]
surely	your	mail	would	be	forwarded	from	Munich.	(Might	he	not	be
coming	 to	Prague?)	And	 the	excitement	at	 the	office	 is	all	 the	more
incomprehensible.	 Your	 job	 in	 Budapest	was	 not	 selling,	 surely;	 the
representative	who	was	 sent	 earlier	 on	must	 have	 attended	 to	 that.
Are	 these	 people	 so	 pig-headed	 and	 mean?	 And	 for	 your	 immense
efforts	you	got	no	[…]	to	do,	also	have	other	[…]	and	commitments,
because—I	am	probably	going	to	Berlin	tomorrow,	am	merely	waiting
for	a	 telegram	to	arrive	 tomorrow	morning.	 Incidentally,	you	do	me



wrong,	 Fräulein	 Grete,	 when	 you	 call	 my	 setting	 a	 time	 limit
“inexplicable,”	you	do	me	wrong	on	this	point	at	least.	I	don’t	know
exactly,	though,	where	you	think	my	wrong	lies;	is	it	that	I	set	a	time
limit	 at	 all,	 or	 that	 I	 am	 still	 setting	 a	 time	 limit?	 I	 should	 almost
understand	 if	 you	meant	 the	 latter,	 but	 this	 doesn’t	 seem	 to	 be	 the
case.	But	you	have	no	idea	what	sort	of	letter	it	was	that	I	answered
with	that	ultimatum	(which,	incidentally,	12	pages	long,	was	written
on	the	spur	of	the	moment,	out	of	dire	necessity).19	The	gist	and	main
phrase	of	F.’s	 letter	was:	“You	told	me	you	were	quite	satisfied	with
the	extent	of	my	love	for	you,	well	and	good.”	I	am	sorry	if	you	do	me
wrong,	 and	of	 course	 this	 sorrow	 is	 in	no	way	balanced	by	 the	 fact
that	in	most	matters	you	have	far	too	high	an	opinion	of	me.
No,	I	won’t	forget	about	Gmünd,	nor	about	Vienna.	Besides,	I	have
a	number	of	 things	 to	 tell	you,	and	many	questions	 to	ask.	 If	 things
don’t	turn	out	satisfactorily	now	in	Berlin,	then	this	really	is	the	end,
and	I	expect	to	be	in	Vienna	for	Easter.	But	otherwise—how	would	it
be	if	you	went	to	Berlin	for	Easter	and	I	got	into	your	compartment	in
Prague?

Kindest	regards,	yours,	Franz	K.

Did	you	actually	receive	(I	am	trying	to	understand	more	clearly
your	 opinion	 of	me)	 the	 letter	 to	 Budapest	 and	 the	 3	 letters	 to
Vienna?

To	Grete	Bloch
April	5,	1914

Dear	Fräulein	Grete—in	haste	and	semidarkness—F.	and	I	agreed	on
the	telephone	yesterday	that	(since	I	should	have	to	have	left	Berlin	at
4:30	 today,	 and	 have	 a	 lot	 of	 tiresome	matters	 to	 deal	 with	 at	 the
office,	at	any	rate	a	lot	for	my	utterly	depleted	office	ability)	I	won’t
come	to	Berlin	until	Easter.	Our	telephonic	understanding	was	pretty
good	 as	 far	 as	 I	 could	 see,	 and	 as	 far	 as	 I	 am	 able	 to	 judge	 this
invention	which	is	new	to	me	and	which	I	hardly	know	how	to	deal
with.	 F.	 has	 already	 telephoned	 me	 3	 or	 4	 times	 this	 week;	 the
telephone	is	on	the	2nd	floor,	I	on	the	4th;	I	am	called	by	telephone	to
go	down,	it	takes	some	little	time	to	find	me,	for	I	am	not	at	my	desk;
instead,	from	necessity	or	simply	to	escape	from	my	work,	I	am	either
standing	with	 one	 of	my	 30	 colleagues	 or	 sitting	 at	 one	 of	my	 two



typewriters;	I	then	run	down	to	the	2nd	floor,	breathlessly	take	a	seat
beside	the	instrument	which	is	not	in	a	booth	but	out	in	the	open	in
the	 president’s	 anteroom	 where	 there	 is	 invariably	 a	 lounging,
listening,	 far	 too	 cheerful,	 and	 far	 too	voluble	 crowd	of	 people	who
can	be	 reduced	 to	 silence	with	a	kick	 if	 they	happen	 to	be	 standing
close	 behind,	 but	 against	whom	one	 is	 powerless	 if	 they	 are	 a	 little
further	away	and	one	is	attached	to	the	instrument;	I	find	that	even	in
ordinary	telephone	conversations	I	can	say	nothing	owing	to	my	total
lack	 of	 quick-wittedness,	 and	 my	 preoccupation	 with	 this	 inability
makes	it	almost	impossible	for	me	to	understand	anything	(it	is	not	so
very	different	when	talking	face	to	face).	Thus	on	a	long-distance	call
I	 understand	 practically	 nothing	 and	 in	 any	 case	 have	 absolutely
nothing	 to	 say,	 am	 therefore	 quite	 unable	 to	 judge.	 When	 F.
telephoned	one	day	about	a	week	ago,	I	talked	with	what	seemed	to
me	a	voice	so	solicitous	that	I	felt	embarrassed	in	front	of	the	entire
president’s	 anteroom,	 yet	 F.	 wrote	 that	 my	 voice	 had	 sounded
“terribly	 cross”—perhaps	 because	 at	 that	 moment	 an	 exuberant
director	was	standing	behind	me	tactfully	pointing	out	that	my	mouth
rather	 than	 my	 eyes	 should	 be	 on	 the	 receiver	 (and	 he	 was
undoubtedly	right).
God	knows	why	my	complaints	about	this	minor	misfortune	should
have	grown	to	such	proportions.	Well,	dear	Fräulein	Grete,	I	am	going
to	 Berlin	 and	 you	 aren’t,	 so	 once	 again	 we	 shan’t	meet	 and	 that	 is
much	 more	 serious.	 Yesterday	 I	 still	 thought	 quite	 definitely	 (even
while	 on	 the	 telephone	 I	 thought	 of	 it,	 instead	 of	 telephoning)	 that
you	would	be	going	to	Berlin,	since	you	haven’t	been	home	for	such	a
long	 time.	 Are	 there	 no	 business	 reasons	 that	 necessitate	 a	 visit?
Incidentally,	I	have	been	racking	my	brains	about	what	those	“private
business	 matters”	 you	 have	 mentioned	 several	 times	 could	 possibly
be.	What’s	more,	three	important	letters	in	one	day	really	is	too	much
(is	one	of	them	from	the	visitor	who	failed	to	turn	up?).	It	would	be
good	if	you	could	tear	yourself	free.	Would	an	excursion	to	the	Wiener
Wald	achieve	it?
You	are	absolutely	right	 in	what	you	say	about	F.	and	me.	 I	don’t
understand	 how	 I	 could	 have	 been	 so	 base	 recently	 as	 to	 persist	 in
expecting	 you,	 who	 are	 not	 in	 touch	with	 F.,	 to	 give	 some	 kind	 of
judgment.	 After	 all,	 apart	 from	 the	 technical	 impossibility	 of	 being
able	 to	 say	 everything,	 whether	 I	 want	 to	 or	 not,	 I	 also	 falsify	 and
withhold.	Needless	to	say,	since	you	are	against	it,	F.	won’t	be	told	a
word	about	you.	In	any	case,	as	far	as	particular	events	of	your	life	are



concerned,	I	have	no	more	than	a	general	idea.
Kindest	regards,	yours,	Franz	K.

March	[presumably	April]	7,	1914
To	tell	the	truth,	F.,	yesterday	while	waiting	anxiously	and	in	vain	for
your	 letter	 (how	 many	 times	 have	 I	 waited	 in	 vain,	 F.?),	 I	 had
decided,	if	your	letter	arrived	today,	not	to	open	it.	In	fact	the	letter
might	have	arrived	on	Sunday;	needless	to	say,	I	felt	impatient	for	an
answer	to	my	last	 letter,	so	I	had	already	waited	all	Sunday	as	well.
Besides,	it	seemed	improbable	that	the	letter	would	arrive	today.	Why
today	of	all	days?	This	letter	that	reached	me	today,	which	I	kept	in
my	pocket	unopened	for	no	more	than	a	few	moments,	and	which	in
spite	of	everything	makes	me	happy	(I	don’t	see	why;	judging	by	the
contents,	 it	 is	 impossible	 to	 see	why)—this	 letter,	 as	 far	 as	 you	 are
concerned,	might	as	well	have	been	written	tomorrow	or	the	next	day
or	not	at	all.	It	doesn’t	seem	to	be	prompted	by	any	great	urge.
My	telegram,	F.,	was	not	angry,	it	may	have	appeared	to	be	on	the
printed	 form.	What	 is	 remarkable	 is	 that	my	 last	 letter	 struck	me	as
angry;	but	since	you	didn’t	feel	it,	perhaps	it	wasn’t,	merely	seemed	to
me	to	be.	All	I	said	in	my	telegram	was	that	I	had	found	it	impossible
to	 answer,	 whereas	 in	 my	 letter	 I	 gave	 the	 reasons,	 and	 in	 my
summary	 became	 aware	 of	 the	 vast	 amount	 that	 still	 is	 not	 clear
between	us.	 Indeed,	 it	 is	a	vast	amount,	but	perhaps	one	word	 from
you	and	it	wouldn’t	be,	perhaps	there	would	be	nothing	left	at	all.
Don’t	 deceive	 yourself,	 F.,	 don’t	 deceive	 yourself!	 The	 part	 your
family	 plays	 in	 your	 last	 letter	 does	 point	 to	 some	 kind	 of	 self-
deception.	 Don’t	 deceive	 yourself!	 You	 needn’t	 tell	me	whether	 you
wished	or	didn’t	wish	me	to	be	humiliated;	you	should	merely	explain
everything	I	put	forward	in	my	last	letter;	the	rest	would	become	clear
automatically.	This	simple	 thing,	however,	 is	 just	what	you	don’t	do
(it	is	no	good	postponing	the	explanation	until	our	meeting,	you	know
that	 in	 your	 presence	 I	 am	 satisfied,	 and	 am	 bound	 to	 be	 satisfied,
with	 everything),	 so	 you	 probably	 can’t.	 But	 in	 that	 case	 you	must
leave	 the	 interpretation	 to	 me.	 Should	 you	 in	 fact	 have	 wished	 to
humiliate	me,	that	wouldn’t	be	the	worst.	After	all,	I	assumed	you	did
(but	 seriously,	 really	 seriously),	 simply	 because	 it	 was	 the	 most
favorable	 interpretation	 from	 my	 point	 of	 view.	 The	 alternative,
supposing	 this	 assumption	 to	 be	 wrong,	 and	 you	 didn’t	 wish	 to



humiliate	me—I’d	rather	not	talk	about	that.
Well,	I	am	coming	at	Easter,	not	at	noon	on	Saturday,	but	Saturday

evening	at	6:51,	if	I	am	not	mistaken.	Needless	to	say,	I	would	prefer
you	to	come	to	the	station	anyway.	Yesterday,	however,	I	learned	that
there	 is	a	possibility	 that	Max	and	his	wife	will	be	coming	with	me,
and	probably	Otto	Pick	as	well	(all	on	literary	business),	and	it	might
be	embarrassing	for	you	to	meet	them	all	at	the	station.	In	that	case
we	should	have	to	meet	(as	early	as	possible,	perhaps	at	7:30,	I	shall
be	staying	at	the	Askanische	Hof	again)	at	a	place	to	be	determined	by
you.
You	want	to	get	a	letter	every	day,	F.?	As	a	matter	of	fact	you	could

have	one,	without	 asking.	But	how	does	 this	 request	 agree	with	 the
scene	 I	 have	 envisaged	 several	 times	 lately	 when	 half-asleep:	 You
place	my	letters—unread	and	at	any	rate	unanswered—one	on	top	of
the	 other;	 or	 else	 you	 fling	 them	 aside,	 one	 after	 another.	 This	 you
shouldn’t	do,	not	even	in	my	half-sleep.

Franz

To	Grete	Bloch
April	7,	1914

Dear	 Fräulein	 Grete,	 so	 things	 are	 better	 again?	 And	 you	 are	 really
thinking	of	going	to	see	the	Grillparzer	Room	both	for	yourself	and	for
me?	I	am	sending	the	“Poor	Musician”	to	act	as	guide	to	the	room.
That	you	overslept	is	surely	a	sign	of	good	health.	I	can’t	oversleep,

yet	derive	no	benefit,	 for	 in	 spite	of	 it	 I	 am	not	 ready	before	12	on
Sundays.	 Partly	 from	 laziness,	 partly	 from	 indecision,	 partly	 in
memory	 of	 former	 (though	 possibly	 not	 better)	 days	 when	 I	 could
sleep	till	12	and	on	into	eternity,	I	lie	awake	by	the	hour	and	hardly
stir.	Even	if	 I	were	Viennese	it	would	probably	be	impossible	for	me
ever	to	get	to	the	Grillparzer	Room.
Is	 there	anything	I	could	do	for	you	on	my	trip	 to	Berlin	(you	got

yesterday’s	letter,	didn’t	you?)—unless	you	decide	at	the	last	moment
to	come	along	after	all?	Whatever	 it	may	be,	 I	would	do	 it	with	 the
greatest	 pleasure	 and	 my	 greatest	 (though	 still	 not	 unduly	 great)
dexterity.	 Perhaps	 a	 visit	 to	 your	parents,	 your	 brother,	 or	 someone
else?	Giving	 them	your	 love	or	good	wishes?	But	not	only	 that,	 just
anything,	anything.

With	kindest	regards,	yours,	Franz	K.



When	are	you	moving?

To	Grete	Bloch
April	8,	1914

Dear	Fräulein	Grete,	your	Monday	letter	and	the	little	parcel	arrived
at	 the	 same	 time	 this	morning.—But	 this	offer	 from	Berlin,	 that	 is	a
stroke	 of	 luck,	 no	 less!	 You	 absolutely	must	 go	 to	 Berlin.	Had	 I	 the
power	 I	 would	make	 this	 paper	 repeat	 the	words:	 “You	must	 go	 to
Berlin”:	loud	and	clear	so	that	they	would	reverberate	throughout	the
office	and	make	your	superiors	next	door	sit	up	and	listen.	Whatever
you	may	have	gone	 through	 in	Berlin,	 things	 I	know	nothing	about,
whatever	 turn	 your	 relationship	 with	 your	 family	 may	 take	 (it’s
certain	 to	be	better	 than	 it	 used	 to	be)—whatever	happens,	 you	are
bound	 to	 gain	by	 taking	 this	 job.	As	 a	 city	Berlin	 is	 so	much	better
than	Vienna,	that	decaying	mammoth	village;	and	since	it	is	they	who
have	approached	you,	you	will	return	to	your	job	in	a	better	position;
you	 return,	 as	 it	 were	 (these	 rare	 opportunities	 should	 never	 be
allowed	 to	 slip	 through	 one’s	 fingers),	 as	 someone	 who	 has	 proved
herself	to	be	in	the	right;	at	all	events,	in	Berlin	your	work	would	be
of	greater	importance	and	pleasanter	(the	farewells	from	your	present
superiors	 can	 be	 nothing	 for	 you	 but	 a	 touching	 sigh	 of	 relief);	 you
will	 be	 able	 to	 travel	 more,	 which	 you	 enjoy;	 moreover,	 supposing
you	wanted	to	leave	again,	you	can	establish	better	contacts	than	you
could	 from	Vienna;	 in	 the	 same	way	 that	you	moved	 from	Berlin	 to
Vienna	you	may	in	time	move	on	to	better	places,	which	wouldn’t	be
easy	 from	Vienna,	as	you	yourself	 admit;	you	were	 surprised	by	 the
pettiness	and	lack	of	understanding	of	your	Viennese	superiors,	which
means	you	didn’t	find	it	so	in	Berlin,	at	least	not	to	the	same	extent;
and	 now	 that	 you	 can	make	 your	 own	 terms	 your	 pay	may	 also	 be
better;	in	any	case,	you	would	be	living	with	your	parents,	and	since
you	are	obliged	 to	help	you	can	do	 so	 in	a	 simpler,	more	profitable
way,	yet	a	way	that	is	easier	to	bear,	easier	for	all	concerned.	Accept!
By	 all	 means	 accept!	 Write	 and	 say	 you	 have	 accepted	 and	 I	 will
congratulate	 you	 on	 the	 telephone—to	 the	 delight	 of	 your	 superiors
listening	in.
But	 if	 you	 do	 accept,	 this	 may	 offer	 an	 opportunity	 for	 going	 to
Berlin	at	Easter.	This	on	the	one	hand	would	dispose	of	 the	obstacle
presented	by	your	parents’	presumably	trying	to	keep	you	there,	and



on	the	other	it	might	be	to	your	advantage	if	you	called	on	the	firm
now.	Well,	you	are	bound	to	know	this	better	than	I	do,	but	so	far	as
your	 acceptance	 is	 concerned,	 if	 you	 heed	 only	 yourself,	 some
momentarily	 overwhelming	 emotion,	 which	 in	 the	 loneliness	 of
Vienna	could	not	lastingly	sustain	you,	might	spoil	it	all.	That	mustn’t
happen.	Accept,	Fräulein	Grete,	accept!
I	 feel	certain	of	your	good	wishes	 for	my	 trip	and	not	 for	 the	 trip
alone.	This	certainty	has	become	so	much	part	of	myself	that	I	am	no
longer	sure	how	much	I	owe	to	it;	it	is	not	little.
The	little	parcel	will	be	handed	to	F.	 just	as	you	say.	I	await	your
further	instructions	in	case	you	don’t	go.

With	kind	regards,	yours,	Franz	K.

April	9,	1914
Well,	 things	are	 improving,	F.,	 today	 I	waited	only	4	hours	 for	your
reply;	nevertheless,	it	was	still	4	hours.	It	is	quite	understandable	that
each	should	seek	his	own	advantage,	that	I	should	want	your	answers
by	letter,	whereas	you	should	want	to	give	them	orally,	for	you	know
that	when	 it	 comes	 to	words	you	need	not	give	 them.	But	have	you
considered	carefully	whether	this	actually	 is	 to	your	advantage?	The
things	 you	 should	 be	 telling	 me,	 you	 should	 after	 all	 be	 telling
yourself	as	well;	whatever	you	keep	from	me,	you	also	keep—at	least	I
hope	you	do—from	yourself.	Really,	you	should	not	do	that,	for	both
our	sakes	you	shouldn’t	do	it.
Don’t	 tell	 me	 I	 am	 being	 too	 severe	 with	 you;	 all	 the	 love	 I	 am
capable	 of	 serves	 only	 you.	 But	 look,	 for	more	 than	 18	months	 we
have	 been	 running	 to	meet	 each	 other,	 yet	 seemed,	 before	 the	 first
month	was	up,	already	to	be	almost	breast	to	breast.	But	now,	after	all
this	 time,	after	 so	much	 running,	we	are	 still	 so	very	 far	apart.	 It	 is
your	 absolute	 duty,	 F.,	 to	 try	 to	 know	 yourself	 to	 the	 best	 of	 your
ability.	 For	 surely,	 when	 finally	 we	 are	 together,	 we	mustn’t	 batter
each	other	to	pieces;	after	all,	we	are	too	good	for	that.
This	is	not	what	I	said	that	day	in	the	Tiergarten.	I	admit	it	is	only
your	friendly	attitude	that	gives	me	a	chance	to	think	about	ourselves,
as	well	as	the	inevitable	necessity	to	do	so.	But	I	don’t	have	to	admit,
for	it	is	clear	enough	that	if	you	withdraw	from	me,	I	lose	all	capacity
to	think	about	ourselves;	besides,	there	is	no	danger	in	that	while	you
are	withdrawing	yourself	from	me.
You	are	right,	I	don’t	know	why	it	should	be	embarrassing	for	you



to	meet	Max	and	his	wife.	 I	realize	now	that	 I	assumed	it	would	be,
simply	because	it	would	have	been	embarrassing	for	me.	Anyway,	that
particular	 danger	 has	 been	 removed;	 I	made	 a	mistake,	 it	was	 only
Max	who	was	 to	 have	 gone,	 and	now	even	Max	 is	 not	 going,	 as	 he
announced	today.	This	leaves	Pick.	It	would	be	better	if	you	came	to
the	Askanische	Hof	at	about	7:30,	but	punctually,	I	beg	you.
No,	Fräulein	Bloch	is	not	coming.	I	like	her	very	much.

Franz



To	Grete	Bloch
April	10,	1914

Dear	 Fräulein	Grete,	 that	 F.	 hasn’t	written	 to	 you	 is,	 unless	 she	 has
very	good	reasons—it	was	on	the	tip	of	my	tongue	to	say	that	F.’s	not
writing	on	a	matter	as	 important	as	this	upsets	my	whole	idea	of	F.,
but	now	I	prefer	to	say	simply	that	it	is	quite	incomprehensible	to	me.
Yet	 I	would	be	pleased	 if	 tomorrow	I	were	 to	have	a	 few	 lines	 from
you	telling	me	that	F.	had	written	after	all.
So	there	is	nothing	you	want	me	to	do	for	you,	and	you	don’t	want
me	to	give	you	news	of	your	family.	The	fact	that	they	are	moving	(in
April	and	at	Easter	of	all	 times!)	wouldn’t	have	prevented	my	going
there	and	wouldn’t	have	prevented	anyone’s	giving	me	messages	 for
you.	Though	 in	order	 to	have	some	advantage	over	a	 letter	 I	 should
have	had	to	tell	a	 lie,	namely,	 that	 I	would	be	seeing	you	soon,	and
I’m	afraid	it	won’t	be	all	that	soon.
But	if	I	agree	with	you	that	I	ought	not	see	your	parents,	then	you
must	agree	with	me,	and	luckily	you	don’t	seem	to	be	so	far	 from	it
now,	that	you	ought	to	leave	Vienna.	Even	if	it	were	only	to	indulge
my	selfishness	which	doesn’t	want	my	hatred	of	Vienna	diminished	by
the	fact	that	you	are	there.
Kindest	regards!	Have	a	good	rest	in	the	country!

Yours,	Franz	K.

Franz	Kafka’s	mother	to	Felice	Bauer
Prague,	April	13,	1914

Dear	Daughter,
Although	we	knew	 the	purpose	of	our	 son’s	 journey	 to	Berlin,	 the
glad	 news	 of	 your	 engagement20	 which	 we	 received	 today	 came
nevertheless	 as	 a	 surprise,	 and	we	would	 like	 to	 have	 sent	 you	 our
congratulations	by	telegram.	But	I	know	only	your	office	address,	dear
Felice,	 so	 you	would	 not	 have	 received	 the	 telegram	 until	 the	 next
day.	Our	one	wish	is	to	see	you	both	happy,	and	with	all	our	hearts
we	hope	you	will	be.	We	very	much	 look	forward	to	embracing	you
before	long,	so	please	propose	yourself	for	a	visit	to	us	very	soon.	We
heartily	reciprocate	your	parents’	kind	wishes,	and	while	my	husband
and	I	embrace	you	tenderly	in	our	thoughts,	I	remain,	your	mother,

Julie	Kafka



Our	children	send	their	kindest	regards.

April	14,	1914
I	am	sure,	F.,	that	I	have	never	at	any	time	taken	a	step	which	has	left
me	 as	 firmly	 convinced	 of	 having	 done	 the	 right	 and	 absolutely
necessary	 thing	 as	 when	 we	 became	 engaged—both	 then	 and	 now.
Certainly	 not	 with	 this	 complete	 absence	 of	 doubt.	 And	 you?	 How
about	you?	Do	you	feel	the	same?	Start	your	next	letter	by	answering
this.
Don’t	 think	 ill	 of	 me	 on	 account	 of	 my	 overtired,	 distracted,

absentminded,	 inattentive,	 and	 possibly	 indifferent	 manner	 during
those	 two	 days.	 It	 meant	 simply	 that	 I	 wasn’t	 quite	 myself,	 but
somehow—perhaps	without	your	wanting	it,	or	admitting	it,	or	even
being	aware	of	it—had	become	part	of	you.
Anyway,	 I	 am	 not	 trying	 to	 say	 they	were	 good	 days	 and	 that	 it

wasn’t	possible	for	them	to	have	been	much	better.	Our	first	evening
together	 passed—on	 the	 surface	 and	 within	 myself—as	 I	 had
anticipated,	precisely	as	I	had	anticipated.	I	had	known	all	along	that
I	would	be	speaking	to	your	father	on	the	following	day,	and	had	not
made	 it	 in	 any	 way	 dependent	 upon	 our	 discussions	 of	 the	 night
before.	I	had	not	even	made	it	dependent	upon	the	hope	of	being	able
to	 take	 up	 the	 discussion	 again	 quietly	 at	 some	 later	 date.	 I	 have
complete	 confidence	 in	 you,	 Felice,	 complete	 confidence,	 try	 and
accept	this	as	best	you	can.	The	fact	that	I	asked	questions,	and	will
go	 on	 asking	 them,	 is	 due	 less	 to	 any	 need	 of	 the	 heart	 than	 to	 a
craving	 for	 logic,	not	very	characteristic	of	me.	Of	course	 this	 is	not
quite	 accurate	 either,	 for	 even	 deep	 beneath	 the	 logic	 there	 are
springs	of	suffering.
(What	 does	 Fräulein	 Bloch	 imply	 in	 her	 telegram	 just	 received:

“Heartfelt	congratulations	from	your	delighted	Grete	Bloch”?)
However,	 the	 nastiest,	 indeed	 the	 vilest	 part	 was	 that,	 except	 for

brief	moments	 in	the	street,	we	were	never	alone,	and	I	could	never
draw	 comfort	 from	 you	 in	 a	 kiss.	 You	 could	 have	 given	 me	 the
opportunity,	yet	did	not	do	so;	I	was	far	too	distracted	to	force	it.	The
rights	 accorded	 to	me	by	 custom	on	 account	 of	my	 engagement	 are
repellent	 to	me	 and	 perfectly	 useless;	 after	 all,	 being	 engaged	 is	 no
more	nowadays	than	a	couple	putting	on	an	act	of	being	married	for
the	amusement	of	others.	This	I	cannot	do;	on	the	other	hand	it	makes
me	suffer	terribly.	There	are	times	when	I	want	to	thank	God	that	we
are	not	 living	 in	 the	 same	 town	 just	now;	but	at	other	 times	 I	don’t



want	to	thank	God	for	it,	for	if	we	were	in	the	same	town	we	would
certainly	 get	 married	 sooner,	 regardless	 of	 anyone’s	 long-service
anniversary.21	 But	 be	 that	 as	 it	 may,	 do	 try	 and	 come	 very	 soon.
Perhaps	 your	 mother	 would	 add	 a	 few	 lines	 to	 your	 letter	 to	 my
parents;	 she	would	 then	 of	 course	 receive	 a	most	 cordial	 invitation.
Have	 you	 told	 them	at	 the	 office	 about	 your	 engagement,	 and	have
you	 agreed	 with	 your	 director	 on	 the	 earliest	 possible	 date	 for
leaving?	 Given	 notice	 to	 the	 doctor?	 Stopped	 work	 on	 the	 revue?
Were	you	to	grant	me	but	one	of	my	many	requests,	let	it	be	this	one:
Don’t	work	so	hard,	go	for	walks,	do	exercises,	do	whatever	you	like,
but	don’t	do	any	work	outside	the	office.	I	will	employ	you	for	your
off-duty	hours,	 and	 send	you	 a	 salary,	 as	much	and	as	 often	 as	 you
like.	I	confirm	this	with	my	signature:

Franz

[IN	THE	MARGIN]	Kindest	regards	to	your	mother	and	sisters.

To	Grete	Bloch
April	14,	1914

Dear	Fräulein	Grete,	it	would	be	nicer	if	instead	of	the	telegram	I	were
holding	your	hand.
In	Berlin	I	got	on	neither	badly	nor	well	but	in	a	manner	that	some

undeniable	 feeling	made	 inevitable.	No	one	 can	ask	 for	more,	 and	 I
know	of	nothing	I	have	ever	done	with	such	determination.	Needless
to	 say,	 I	 am	 talking	 only	 of	 the	 inevitable	 necessity	 that	 existed	 for
me,	not	for	F.
I	wouldn’t	have	written	to	you	today,	Fräulein	Grete,	for	I	am	very

tired,	 had	 hardly	 any	 sleep	 in	 Berlin,	 had	 to	 use	 all	 my	 remaining
energy	 for	 my	 work	 at	 the	 office	 today,	 not	 forgetting	 that	 I	 have
several	more	hours’	work	to	do—but	there	is	one	thing	I	can’t	tell	you
soon	enough	and	 that’s	 this:	Our	 relationship,	which	 for	me	at	 least
holds	 delightful	 and	 altogether	 indispensable	 possibilities,	 is	 in	 no
way	changed	by	my	engagement	or	my	marriage.	 Is	 this	a	 fact,	 and
will	it	remain	so?	I	repeat,	in	case	it	hasn’t	been	made	clear	already:
All	 this	 is	 independent	 of	 anything	 that	 I	 and	 F.	 (so	 far	 as	 I,	 the
bridegroom,	can	say	this)	owe	to	you	in	our	affairs.
F.	 told	 me	 about	 an	 express	 letter	 in	 which	 you	 wrote	 that	 you



mean	to	go	to	Budapest	for	2	or	3	months.	Did	I	understand	correctly?
How	can	this	be	reconciled	with	your	intention	of	going	to	Berlin?
And	will	it	really	be	possible	for	you	to	come	to	Prague	(perhaps	on

business)	when	F.	is	here	at	the	end	of	April	or	early	May?	Of	course
she	would	arrange	it	to	fit	in	with	you.	Actually	I	wanted	to	prevent	F.
from	mentioning	this	to	you,	since	it	might	have	looked	as	if	it	were
not	 meant	 seriously,	 for	 unfortunately	 there	 doesn’t	 appear	 to	 be
much	chance	of	your	being	able	to	arrange	to	come	here.	But	perhaps
a	joint	visit	to	Gmünd?	Do	write	to	F.	about	it.

Kindest	regards,	yours,	Franz	K.

To	Grete	Bloch
April	15,	1914

Dear	Fräulein	Grete,	I	feel	an	unmistakable	and	true	longing	for	you.
Today	when	I	saw	the	posters	 for	 the	office	exhibition	(June	20–29)
for	 the	 first	 time	on	my	way	to	work,	 I	became	quite	cheerful.	Does
this	mean	you	 are	 coming?	For	 a	week?	 Lovely,	 lovely,	 lovely!	And
you	intend	to	come	before	then,	on	the	2nd,	3rd	of	May	and	face	the
long	journey?	Needless	to	say,	F.	will	arrange	to	be	here	at	the	same
time;	I’ll	write	and	tell	her	tomorrow,	you	have	probably	told	her,	too.
But	perhaps	the	3	of	us	could	meet	in	Gmünd	the	way	you	and	I	had
in	mind.	But	I	just	don’t	know	whether	engaged	couples	can	do	that;
non-engaged	 couples	 are	 far	 better	 off,	 they	 can	 do	 everything,	 and
are	not	obliged	to	do	anything.
What	 is	 this	 that	 has	 crept	 into	 your	 letters?	 You	 cross	 out	 a

sentence	to	the	point	of	illegibility	and	cut	short	a	paragraph	because
it	concerns	you?	I	trust	you	realize	the	necessity	of	my	last	letter.	You
mustn’t	give	me	up,	that’s	out	of	the	question	and	I	won’t	stand	for	it.
Nor	is	there	the	slightest	reason	for	it.	And	I	want	to	know	how	you
are,	what	train	you	have	to	meet,	and	what	sentences	you	cross	out.
According	to	your	 last	postcard	it	seems	you	want	to	abandon	the

idea	of	Berlin	again.	There’s	no	need	to	sit	at	the	foot	of	ruins	in	order
to	 enjoy	 the	 world,	 this	 one	 can	 do	 equally	 well	 on	 the
Hundekehlensee,22	 and	 the	 further	 it	 is	 from	Vienna	 the	better.	You
don’t	 believe	 it?	 I	 don’t	 know	 what	 the	 “unconditional	 surrender”
means,	I	deliberately	did	not	discuss	it	with	F.;	but	she	kept	repeating
how	your	mother	wants	to	have	you	around.	And	F.	will	be	in	Berlin
for	a	long	time	yet.	She	doesn’t	want	to	get	married	before	September.



After	all,	that’s	almost	another	six	months.
I	 remember	 now	 how	 I	 used	 to	 keep	 talking	 about	 a	 certain

resolution	 that	 gave	 me	 strength,	 without	 disclosing	 what	 it	 was.
According	to	this	resolution,	 if	 I	were	not	going	to	marry	F.	 I	would
have	given	up	my	job	here	or,	if	possible,	taken	a	prolonged	leave	of
absence	and	gone	to	Berlin	(not	on	account	of	F.	but	of	Berlin	and	its
numerous	possibilities),	and	become	a	journalist	or	something	of	the
kind.	Now,	Fräulein	Grete,	what	do	you	think	of	this	in	retrospect?
“The	 Poor	 Musician”	 is	 beautiful,	 isn’t	 it?	 I	 remember	 reading	 it

once	to	my	youngest	sister;	I	read	it	as	I	had	never	read	anything	to
anyone	before.	 I	was	 so	 completely	absorbed	by	 it	 that	 there	would
have	 been	 no	 room	 inside	 me	 for	 an	 error	 in	 emphasis,	 breathing,
intonation,	 sympathy,	 or	 understanding;	 it	 really	 burst	 forth	 from
inside	me	with	superhuman	ease;	 I	was	delighted	with	every	word	 I
uttered.	This	will	never	be	repeated,	I	should	never	dare	to	read	it	out
loud	again.
You	were	sad	up	there	by	the	ruin	in	the	grass?	Nothing	seems	more

natural	 to	me.	 I’ve	always	been	sad	 in	 the	country.	What	strength	 it
takes	 to	 become	 attuned	 to	 the	 panorama	 of	 such	wide	 vistas!	 In	 a
Berlin	 street	 I	 succeed	 in	no	 time	at	all.	And	yet	you	were	calm	out
there	and	inwardly	at	peace.

Kindest,	kindest	regards,	yours,	Franz	K.

To	Grete	Bloch
April	16,	1914

Dear	 Fräulein	Grete,	 that	was	 really	much	 better.	 Of	 course	 I	 knew
exactly	 what	 you	 were	 going	 to	 write,	 you	 have	 hinted	 at	 it	 often
enough,	 you	 have	 tried	 often	 enough	 to	 wriggle	 out	 of	 the	 noose,
which	actually	is	no	noose	at	all	but	only—well,	at	any	rate	I	shall	try
to	hold	on	to	this	noose	with	all	my	teeth	in	case	you	intend	to	free
yourself	 from	 it.	 But	 that’s	 unthinkable.	 And	 the	 letters?	 The	 past
ones,	of	 course,	are	at	your	disposal	 (the	 future	ones	not!),	but	why
don’t	you	want	them	to	remain	in	my	possession?	Why	in	fact	should
there	be	the	slightest	change?	Anyhow,	what	good	are	rules	to	people,
or	in	relation	to	people?	To	this	day	I	still	maintain	that	I	don’t	want
any	strangers	around,	but	in	the	same	breath	I	maintain	that	I	shall	be
delighted	with	every	moment	you	spend	with	us	(today,	however,	this
“us”	is	little	more	than	a	fable).	If	you	are	against	it,	F.	won’t	read	the



letters;	nor	is	it	necessary,	for	by	now	F.	knows	who	you	are,	or	could
know	even	without	the	letters.	And	if	she	doesn’t	know,	then	even	the
letters	wouldn’t	help	her.
Aren’t	 you	 proud	 that	 they	 are	 so	 anxious	 to	 have	 you	 in	 Berlin?

The	idea	of	your	exceptional	business	efficiency	seems	strange	to	me.	I
possess	so	little	of	this	virtue	that	I	can’t	imagine	what	it	consists	of.
But	I	keep	hearing	about	it,	now	in	Berlin	again;	I	believe	it,	of	course,
but	in	spite	of	all	my	efforts	I	can’t	quite	associate	it	with	the	Fräulein
Grete	I	am	addressing,	I	can	see	it	only	vaguely,	no	more.
Why	aren’t	you	coming	to	Berlin	until	August	1?	Why	this	stay	of

execution?	Who	in	Berlin,	for	heaven’s	sake,	has	designs	on	your	head
other	 than	 to	 stroke	 it?	Do	come	sooner!	For	 instance	 for	 that,	 alas,
great	day	which	 is	called	a	 reception	 in	your	part	of	 the	world,	and
which	is	supposed	to	take	place	at	Whitsun.23
Frau	B[auer]?	Well,	to	me	she	is	slightly	sinister,	I	to	her—very.	She

can	make	me	out	least	of	all;	the	others	can,	more	or	less,	though	only
with	 the	 help	 of	 some	misconceptions.	 I	 like	 Toni	 very	much,	 Erna
too,	though	I	saw	her	for	only	a	few	minutes	on	Saturday	evening;	on
Sunday	 and	 Monday	 she	 was	 in	 Hanover.	 Frau	 B.’s	 somehow
suspicious	eye	was	always	on	me,	though	had	I	been	in	her	place	my
eyes	would	 have	 been	 far	more	 suspicious—which	 in	 fact	 they	 are,
even	 in	my	place.	Well,	 sometimes	 she	 thought	 I	was	 ill,	 sometimes
absurd,	 usually	 silly,	 and	 occasionally	 too	 sly	 by	 half;	 such	 an
assortment	of	judgments	doesn’t	make	for	a	very	happy	attitude	even
toward	a	future	son-in-law.	Altogether	there	was	nothing	particularly
likable	 to	 be	 observed	 about	 me;	 I	 was	 overtired,	 distracted,
inattentive,	 and	 at	 the	 same	 time	 absentminded	 and	 overstimulated
(one	 of	 my	 ugliest	 and	 most	 frequent	 states),	 quite	 unnecessarily
flaunted	my	vegetarianism,	ate	only	vegetables,	couldn’t	have	been	a
bigger	bore,	and	only	a	godlike	perception	would	have	recognized	the
calmness	and	the	necessity	of	my	actions	and	my	existence.
Kindest	regards,	yours,	Franz	K.

April	17,	1914
Dearest	F.,	I	have	only	10	minutes,	and	not	even	all	of	that.	In	such	a
rush,	what	 can	 I	 do	 and	 say?	 First	 of	 all,	 thank	 you	 for	 designating
August	 as	 the	month	 for	 leaving	 your	 office,	 let	 it	 stay	 that	 way.	 I
looked	 “terribly	 ill”;	 no	 doubt,	 I	 felt	 it	 too;	 for	 six	 months	 I	 have
struggled	 hard	 to	 acquire	 this	 appearance.	 Looking	 after	 myself



wouldn’t	help;	the	passing	of	time	will	help,	and	every	day	by	which
you	bring	forward	the	appointed	date	will	help,	and	all	the	confidence
you	place	in	me	and	all	the	patience	you	show	toward	me	will	help,
and	the	last	most	of	all.	We	do	seem	to	be	(it	is	dangerous	to	embark
on	 these	 pointed	 remarks	 when	 in	 a	 hurry),	 we	 do	 seem	 to	 be
outwardly	 diametrical	 opposites,	 so	 we	 must	 be	 patient	 with	 each
other,	must	 have	 almost	 godlike	 perception—given	 only	 in	 cases	 of
exceptionally	 heightened	 human	 sensibility—of	 the	 other’s	 needs,
truths,	and	sense	of	belonging.	I	have	this	perception,	F.,	which	is	why
my	confidence	 in	our	 future	 is	 great.	 I	 tremble	with	 joy	whenever	 I
think	I	see	the	merest	gleam	of	this	perception	in	your	eyes.

Franz

Write	at	once,	even	if	only	a	few	words.
Isn’t	 there	 something	 I	 could	 do	 to	 give	 Frl.	 Brühl	 a	 little

pleasure?	I	can’t	bear	to	hear	about	weeping	girls.

To	Grete	Bloch
April	17,	1914

Dear	 Fräulein	Grete,	 letters	 to	 three	uncles	 and	one	 aunt	have	been
written,	so	now	I	can	grant	myself	the	pleasure	of	writing	to	you.
It	is	nice	that	you	are	in	such	complete	agreement	with	my	plans	for

moving	 to	Berlin.	 I	do	want	 to	go	 to	Berlin,	Berlin	does	me	good	 in
every	way.	But	it	would	surely	be	taking	a	great	risk	if	I	were	to	give
up	my	 safe	 job	 now.	On	my	 own	 I	 could	 have	 done	 it,	 or	 rather,	 I
should	have	done	it.	But	now,	with	F.?	Am	I	entitled	to	persuade	her
to	give	up	her	good	job	to	which	she	is	so	attached,	in	order	perhaps
to	 suffer	 hardships	 with	 me	 in	 that	 same	 Berlin?	 As	 you	 know,	 I
haven’t	much	self-confidence,	nor	has	it	been	greatly	increased	by	my
past	and	my	way	of	life	as	an	employee.

Late,	 late.	Today	 the	only	 thing	 left	 for	me	 to	do	 is	 to	 send	you	my
kindest	regards.	It	gives	me	pleasure	to	be	able	to	do	this	every	day.

Yours,	Franz	K.

So	far	F.	hasn’t	mentioned	your	letter.



To	Grete	Bloch
April	18,	1914

Dear	Fräulein	Grete,	after	reading	your	first	letter	I	knew	at	once	what
I	 ought	 to	 tell	 you:	 that	 fundamentally	 your	 view	 of	 F.’s	 attitude
toward	 you	 is	 by	 no	 means	 as	 clear	 as	 you	 describe	 it	 in	 writing.
Writing	 itself	 often	 leads	 to	 false	 formulations.	 Sentences	 have	 their
own	force	of	gravity	from	which	one	cannot	escape.	I	don’t	even	want
to	quote	the	sentence	in	which	you	summarize	F.’s	alleged	opinion	of
you.	It	would	make	you	cross.	The	sentence	is	by	no	means	bad,	 it’s
good,	like	your	entire	nature;	it	is	by	no	means	as	bad,	for	instance,	as
the	vile	terms	of	abuse	that	a	short	time	ago	when	half-asleep	I	used
against	F.	 (who	knows	about	 it)—nevertheless,	you	had	to	withdraw
it,	if	not	at	once,	then	the	next	day,	and	you	would	have	withdrawn	it
even	if	F.’s	letter	hadn’t	arrived.	As	it	turned	out,	a	question	I	posed	at
8:30	 in	 the	morning	was	 answered	 by	 your	 letter	 written	 at	 10:30.
Even	so,	if	you	were	to	ask	me	directly	for	my	opinion	of	F.’s	attitude
toward	you,	I	wouldn’t	be	able	to	give	an	entirely	satisfactory	one—
not	that	this	would	be	significant,	there	are	other	questions	I	couldn’t
answer	either,	many	other	questions.
As	for	the	letters,	it	is	only	your	present	opinion	that	I	am	to	burn

them	once	I	am	married.	Well,	I	am	not	married	yet,	and	only	when	I
am	will	the	opinion	you	then	have	be	decisive.	So	please	leave	them
in	 my	 possession,	 at	 least	 for	 the	 present.	 You	 once	 gave	 me	 the
pleasure	of	 receiving	 them,	 so	 give	me	 the	pleasure	now	of	 keeping
them	a	little	longer.	Incidentally,	do	you	think	that	we,	F.	and	I,	could
be	a	united	 couple	 if	we	 couldn’t	 see	 things	 in	 the	 same	 light,	 even
over	 a	matter	 of	 such	 personal	 importance	 to	 us	 as	 the	 contents	 of
your	letters?
You	must	also	allow	me	my	admiration	for	your	business	efficiency.

If	 I	 were	 in	 your	 place,	 an	 efficient	 organization	 would	 become
inefficient	 long	 before	 I	 became	 efficient.	 And	 the	 granting	 of	 a
patent?	If	only	I	could	appreciate	that	in	all	its	detail!	I	have	an	idea
that	you	took	the	trouble	to	explain	certain	things	to	me	that	day	in
the	hotel	room,	but	I	have	retained	nothing.
You	 definitely	 should	 be	 in	 Berlin	 no	 later	 than	 July	 1!	 Quite

definitely.	And	quite	definitely	this	will	make	you	feel	better	from	the
point	of	view	of	business:	even	I	feel	the	invigorating	effect	of	Berlin,
or	rather	I	know	I	would	feel	it	if	I	moved	there.	But	after	all,	for	me
the	risks	are	great,	I	have	no	control	over	my	capacity	for	writing.	It



comes	and	goes	like	a	phantom.	I	haven’t	written	anything	for	a	year,
nor	can	I,	as	far	as	I	know.	Yet	in	the	last	few	days	I	had	a	stroke	of
luck,	 equivalent	 to	 your	 receipt	 of	 a	 patent:	 a	 story,24	 actually	 my
longest,	but	also	my	only	story	(written	a	year	ago)	has	been	accepted
by	the	Neue	Rundschau,	moreover	with	some	further	pleasing	offers.	It
wouldn’t	be	so	rash	for	me	to	go	to	Berlin	if	I	had	written	anything	in
the	 course	 of	 this	 year,	 but,	 as	 things	 are,	 it	 would	 surely	 be	 a
desperate	act	to	drag	F.	out	of	her	present	agreeable	situation	into	a
life	of	such	uncertainty.	Surely	you	must	admit	that,	too.

Kindest	regards,	yours,	Franz	K.

[IN	THE	MARGIN]	About	our	meeting—shortly.

To	Felice	Bauer’s	mother
April	19,	1914

Dear	Mother,
Now	 the	 memories	 of	 those	 two	 days	 are	 beginning	 to	 fall	 into

place,	and	today,	calmly	and	definitely,	 I	can	thank	you	with	all	my
heart,	you,	Father,	and	all	of	you.	During	those	two	days	I	really	felt
myself	to	be	a	permanent,	really	permanent	recipient	of	gifts,	and	in
the	 fact	of	your	giving	me	Felice	 I	 saw	 the	 surest	 sign	of	affection	 I
could	ever	ask	of	you,	and	for	which	I	could	never	offer	you	sufficient
thanks.
Everything	 else	 is	 unimportant.	 It	 is	 unimportant	 that	 you,	 dear

Mother,	 may	 have	 detected	 certain	 shortcomings	 in	 me,	 and	 may
discover	 further	 shortcomings,	 without	 being	 able	 to	 change	 them.
None	of	us	is	perfect	in	our	own	eyes,	how	much	less	so	in	the	eyes	of
others.	But	that,	dearest	Mother,	is	not	the	first	thing	to	consider;	first
and	foremost,	bear	in	mind	that	you	are	giving	Felice	to	a	man	who
certainly	 loves	 her	 no	 less	 than	 you	 do	 (in	 his	 own	 quite	 different
fashion,	of	course),	and	who	will	strive	to	the	limits	of	his	powers	to
give	her	a	happy	life.
And	now	do	come	soon,	everyone	is	looking	forward	to	your	visit.

Any	postponement	would	be	pointless;	every	postponement	makes	me
sad.	Besides,	the	finding	of	an	apartment	makes	it	 important	for	you
to	come	soon.	Should	Felice	hesitate,	then,	dearest	Mother,	do	secretly
urge	her	on	a	little.



With	warmest	greetings	and	kisses	to	you	and	everyone	from
your	Franz

April	19,	1914
What	a	 joy,	dearest,	 to	be	 for	once	 in	 the	wrong	about	 letters.	Most
certainly	my	 letter	 to	your	mother	 should	have	been	written	before,
yet	 I	wrote	 it	 only	 today.	 I	 should	 also	 have	 sent	 the	 book	 to	 your
father	on	Tuesday,	but	didn’t	send	it	until	Friday.	But	firstly	I	am	not
at	all	punctual	about	letter-writing	(my	letters	to	you	are	not	so	much
letters	as	whimpers	and	baring	of	teeth);	my	hand	is	heavy,	and	when,
as	 recently,	 there	 is	 no	 news	 from	 you,	 then	 my	 hand	 becomes
completely	paralyzed	and	incapable	even	of	packing	up	the	book	for
your	father.
Am	I	aware	of	the	fact	that	I	am	entirely	yours?	I	did	not	have	to
become	 aware	 of	 that,	 I	 have	 known	 it	 for	 18	 months.	 The
engagement	 has	 altered	 nothing;	 my	 awareness	 could	 not	 be
established	more	firmly.	On	the	contrary,	there	are	times	when	I	think
that	you,	F.,	don’t	quite	realize	how	completely	and	in	how	special	a
fashion	I	belong	to	you.	Just	be	patient,	everything	will	become	clear
and	we	shall	be	the	most	united	of	couples.	Dearest,	dearest	F.,	if	only
we	had	reached	 that	point!	This	 fleeting	 relationship	of	ours—a	 few
Sundays	 in	 Berlin,	 a	 few	 days	 in	 Prague—cannot	 solve	 everything,
though	 the	 heart	 of	 the	 matter	 may	 have	 been	 solved	 long	 ago,
perhaps	since	the	very	first	time	I	looked	into	your	eyes.
Our	thoughts	were	at	variance;	I	was	under	the	impression	that	you
would	be	writing	to	my	mother,	so	I	omitted	writing	to	your	mother.
You	say	you	would	have	to	 invite	yourself.	Why?	Didn’t	you	get	 the
letter	my	mother	wrote	last	Monday	in	which	she	invited	you,	and	no
doubt	most	cordially?

A	 friend	 of	 my	 uncle	 [Alfred	 Löwy]	 in	 Madrid,	 who	 works	 at	 the
Austrian	Embassy	 there,	has	been	here,	 and	 I	went	 for	 a	 short	walk
with	him.	Strange:	it’s	late	now,	we	walked	about	a	good	deal,	Ottla
as	well	as	a	cousin	came	with	us,	we	met	some	other	people	as	well,
and	now	that	I	sit	down	after	what	is	for	me	a	most	unusual	venture
(in	 the	 last	 few	 years	 I	 don’t	 think	 I	 have	 been	 for	 a	 walk	 in	 the
daytime	 except	 alone	 or	with	 Felix,	 the	 other	 Felix),	 now	 that	 I	 sit
down	in	order	to	write	to	you,	I	realize	that	I	don’t	have	to	change	my



way	of	thinking	in	the	least,	but	that	you,	and	nothing	but	you,	were
in	my	mind	during	the	entire	walk—in	the	tram,	in	the	Baumgarten,
by	 the	pond,	 listening	 to	 the	music,	 eating	bread	and	butter	 (I	 even
had	 a	 bite	 of	 bread	 and	 butter	 this	 afternoon,	 one	 enormity	 after
another!),	 and	on	 the	way	home.	 Spiritually	 I	 am	 so	 indissolubly	 at
one	with	you	that	no	rabbinical	blessing	could	bring	you	closer.
I	won’t	give	the	announcement	to	the	newspapers	until	 tomorrow,
for	 Tuesday.	 My	 director	 returns	 tomorrow	 and	 I	 don’t	 want	 the
announcement	 to	 appear	 in	 the	 papers	 until	 I	 have	 told	 him
personally.	You	will	get	the	paper	on	Wednesday.	As	you	can	imagine,
nearly	 everyone	 whose	 business	 it	 is	 knows	 about	 it	 by	 now.	 And
what	 did	 your	 friends	 and	 acquaintances	 have	 to	 say?	Did	many	 of
them	 repeat	 what	 the	 hairdresser	 said?—Finally—and	 this	 is	 how
every	letter	is	going	to	end—I	think	you	should	come	very	soon.	But
when,	F.,	when?

Yours,	Franz

Please	write	and	tell	me	at	once	about	your	headaches.

April	20,	1914
My	 dearest,	 I	 come	 home	 this	 evening	 after	 wandering	 around
aimlessly	on	tennis	courts,	in	the	streets,	at	the	office	(on	the	chance
of	 finding	 some	message	 from	 you	 there),	 and	 now	 find	 your	 letter
waiting.	When	 there	 is	no	news	of	you	 I	become	 incapable	of	doing
anything;	I	was	actually	incapable	of	putting	that	small	announcement
in	 the	 papers	 although	 it	 would	 be	 possible	 now,	 since	 I	 told	 my
director	 today.	 But	 I	 couldn’t;	 as	 a	 matter	 of	 fact,	 it	 wasn’t	 in	 the
Berliner	Tageblatt	either.
I	can’t	even	remember	what	it	was	that	kept	me	so	busy	the	other
day,	 it	 can’t	 have	 been	 anything	 of	 major	 importance.	 Matters	 of
minor	 importance	 delayed	 me	 then	 as	 they	 did	 today.	 What	 a
makeshift	life	without	you!
Of	course	Max	and	I	meet—every	day,	in	fact.	On	thinking	it	over,
however,	I	don’t	believe	we	are	as	close	as	we	used	to	be,	at	least	at
times.	(At	no	time	were	we	as	close	as	when	traveling	together.	Wait,
before	long	I’ll	send	you	two	little	things	in	print	about	our	travels,	a
fairly	tolerable	one	by	me,	and	another	quite	intolerable	one	written
jointly	by	the	two	of	us.25	I	don’t	make	promises	into	the	blue	like	you
do	with	the	letter	for	my	mother,	the	advertising	stamps	for	my	chief,



the	Berliner	Tageblatt,	and	your	giving	notice	to	the	doctor.	I	too	make
promises	into	the	blue;	but	my	blue	is	not	quite	so	infinite.)	It	is	my
fault	that	we	(to	be	on	the	safe	side,	I	repeat:	Max	and	I)	are	no	longer
as	 close;	 he	 in	 his	 innocence	 is	 not	 acutely	 aware	 of	 it,	 has	 even
dedicated	to	me	his	latest	novel,	Tycho	Brahe’s	Road	to	God,26	one	of
the	 most	 intimate	 of	 his	 books,	 a	 story	 of	 positively	 painful	 self-
torment.	But	even	this	fault	of	mine	is	not	really	a	fault,	at	least	only
to	a	minor	degree.	Max	does	not	understand	me,	and	where	he	does,
he	is	wrong.	Lately,	in	spite	of	my	superficial	loquacity	(as	yet	you	are
not	familiar	with	this	vice,	nor	is	it	one	of	yours,	which	is	yet	another
reason	why	I	love	you),	I	have	become	more	and	more	taciturn,	more
and	more	unsociable;	in	spite	of	this	inner	urge	to	be	loquacious,	and
even	a	more	 legitimate	desire	 to	 impart	 information,	 I	 cannot	break
out	of	myself;	it	is	not	actually	shyness,	rather	a	feeling	of	discomfort
in	 the	presence	of	 people,	 an	 inability	 to	 establish	 complete,	 lasting
relationships;	 I	 so	 rarely	 lose	 the	detached	 eye	 (can	you	understand
that?);	I	venture	to	claim	that	it	is	rare	for	anyone	to	have,	as	I	have,
silently	 from	 a	 distance,	 without	 being	 directly	 compel——	 final
interruption:	2	uncles	have	arrived,	one	from	Triesch	in	Moravia,	the
other,	an	eccentric,	lives	here	in	Prague;27	I	must	stop,	but	if	only	to
prevent	you	from	worrying	about	the	half-finished	sentence,	worrying
unnecessarily,	believe	me,	we	do	trust	each	other,	don’t	we?	Well,	to
prevent	you	worrying,	 I	complete	 the	sentence	——led	to	do	so,	 the
faculty	 of	 grasping	 the	 essence	 of	 people	 so	 completely	 that	 it
frightens	 even	 me.	 That	 I	 have.	 This	 faculty,	 however,	 is	 almost	 a
danger	 to	me	when	I	am	not	writing.	But	nothing	 is	a	danger	 to	me
now	 that	 I	 have	 you,	 and	 for	 you	 too,	 dearest,	 there	 should	 be	 no
dangers.

Franz

No	headaches,	definitely	none!
Give	the	doctor	notice!	Come	soon!
Get	the	trousseau	ready!

[April	21,	1914]
A	kind	of	madness,	a	malady,	F.,	but	when	there	isn’t	a	letter	or	some
short	 message	 from	 you,	 I	 can	 do	 nothing,	 not	 even	 put	 the
announcement	 in	 the	paper.	Not	 that	 I	am	anxious	now	as	 I	used	 to



be;	after	all,	we	do	belong	together	(as	is	proclaimed	loudly	by	the	B.
T.	 [Berliner	 Tageblatt]	 and	 more	 softly	 but	 more	 definitely	 by	 my
heart),	 and	 it	 doesn’t	matter	 if	 at	 times	 there	 is	 no	 news;	 indeed	 it
should	be	 a	 good	 thing	 if	 a	 respite	 from	all	 your	hard	work	were	 a
real	respite	and	not	taken	up	with	writing,	but	all	the	same—I	won’t
put	in	the	announcement	until	tomorrow,	you	will	get	it	on	Friday.28
However,	 this	 is	 not	 a	 failure	 to	 agree,	 F.;	 anyway	 I	 feel	 the	papers
have	 little	 to	 do	 with	 our	 affairs.	 There	 is	 even	 something	 slightly
weird	about	 the	notice	 in	 the	[Berliner]	Tageblatt;	 the	announcement
of	the	reception	sounds	to	me	as	though	on	Whitsunday	F.K.	is	going
to	 give	 a	 demonstration	 of	 looping	 the	 loop	 in	 a	 variety	 show.	 The
two	 names,	 however,	 sit	 well	 and	 snugly	 together;	 that’s	 good,	 and
the	way	it	has	to	be.
It’s	 late;	 I	didn’t	get	 the	express	 letter	until	 just	now,	9	o’clock;	 in

any	 case	 it	 didn’t	 arrive	 at	 the	 office	 till	 after	 2.	 Fondest	 greetings,
thanks	for	the	kiss,	which	I	cannot	reciprocate,	for	when	kissing	from
a	 distance	 one	 falls	 with	 one’s	 well-meant	 kiss	 into	 darkness	 and
delirium	instead	of	touching	the	dear,	distant	lips.

Franz

To	Grete	Bloch
April	21,	1914

Dear	 Fräulein	 Grete,	 I	 don’t	 quite	 know	 what	 you	 mean	 by	 your
description	of	your	general	attitude	to	people.	You	state	it	specifically
as	 well	 as	 in	 general,	 but	 it	 applies	 neither	 in	 general	 nor	 to	 me
personally,	 thus	 it	 applies	 only	 to	 one	 particular	 case	 that	 keeps
churning	about	in	your	poor	troubled	head,	and	about	which	I	know
nothing	 or	 too	 little.	 So	 far	 as	 I	 am	 concerned,	what	 you	 say	 is	 all
wrong.	Toward	me	your	behavior	has	been	so	correct	and	above	all	so
steadfast,	 swayed	 by	 neither	 your	 own	 feelings	 nor	 mine,	 that	 one
might	 think	you	were	not	a	 separate	person	but	my	own	conscience
endowed	with	its	own	independent,	good,	and	lovable	life.	You	must
believe	 this!	 Perhaps	 you	 are	 generally	 mistaken	 about	 your	 own
character.	Perhaps	you	disregard	yourself	too	much,	are	too	good,	too
heroic.	It	seems	so	at	times.	The	number	of	people	who	have	cause	to
be	grateful	to	you	can’t	be	small.	Do	they	come	into	the	third	category
of	 your	 classification?	 In	 that	 case	 I’ll	 take	 good	 care	 not	 to	 be
grateful.



There	wasn’t	a	“drastic	settling	of	accounts”	in	my	last	letter,	there
certainly	wasn’t,	 it	was	meant	 to	be	a	grasping	and	clasping	of	your
hand,	that’s	all.	And	you	know	it.	The	ambiguity	in	your	relationship
with	F.	is	not	your	fault,	provided	there	is	this	ambiguity	and	that	it
doesn’t	exist	merely	in	my	own	eyes,	which	are	at	the	same	time	both
dim	and	overalert.
Did	 you	 decide	 about	 Berlin	while	 on	 the	 Semmering?	With	 your

eyes	open	and	not	out	of	desperation?	And	so	you	won’t	be	going	to
Budapest?	 And	 be	 in	 Prague	 on	 the	 2nd	 of	May?	 Gmünd	would	 be
much	 better;	 I	 haven’t	 mentioned	 it	 to	 F.	 yet;	 there	 would	 be
difficulties,	F.	is	staying	only	a	few	days,	and	the	day	at	Gmünd	would
be	one	 less	 for	her	 to	make	visits,	and	one	would	have	to	spend	the
night,	leave	her	mother	in	Prague,	and	I	should	have	committed	one
more	ghastly	folly;	the	trip	could	be	undertaken	only	on	Sunday,	the
one	day	when	my	parents	are	completely	free—nevertheless,	it	would
be	lovely	and	free	in	Gmünd,	and	at	least	worth	considering	up	to	the
very	last	moment.
If	 you	 should	 be	 looking	 forward	 to	 the	 “story”	 [The

Metamorphosis]?	 I	don’t	know,	you	didn’t	 like	 the	“Stoker.”	Anyway,
the	 “story”	 is	 looking	 forward	 to	 you,	 there’s	 no	 doubt	 about	 that.
Incidentally,	 the	 heroine’s	 name	 is	 Grete	 and	 she	 doesn’t	 discredit
you,	at	least	not	in	the	first	section.	Later	on,	though,	when	the	agony
becomes	too	great,	she	withdraws,	embarks	on	a	life	of	her	own,	and
leaves	the	one	who	needs	her.	An	old	story,	by	the	way,	more	than	a
year	 old;	 at	 that	 time	 I	 hadn’t	 begun	 to	 appreciate	 the	 name	Grete,
learned	to	do	so	only	during	the	process	of	writing.
Kindest	regards	(the	adjectives	must	suffice,	one	doesn’t	send	them

off	into	the	blue,	 it’s	not	the	adjectives	that	have	to	be	right	but	the
person	to	whom	they	are	sent),

yours,	Franz	K.

April	22,	1914
My	dear	F.,	every	page	of	writing	paper	used	up,	this	scrap	off	one	of
your	letters	is	all	that’s	left.	By	getting	engaged,	you	know,	I	thought	I
would	provide	you	with	more	free	time,	but	apparently	I	have	given
you	a	lot	more	work.	A	great	pity!	I	have	just	had	a	very	kind	letter
from	your	father;	my	mother	is	worried	in	some	way	about	a	few	lines
you	wrote	 to	my	 father.	What	 a	 fuss!	 Come	 soon,	 let’s	 get	married,



let’s	put	an	end	to	 it.	The	beautiful	apartment	 I	mentioned	won’t	be
available	 until	 February,	 and	 even	 that	 is	 doubtful.	 A	 beautiful,
beautifully	situated,	fairly	expensive	apartment,	with	an	equal	number
of	irreplaceable	advantages	and	disadvantages,	is	on	offer	to	us	until
the	 evening	 of	 May	 2nd.	 This	 means	 that	 you	 will	 have	 to	 be	 in
Prague	no	later	than	May	1st.
What’s	happening	about	Fräulein	Grete’s	visit?

Franz

April	24,	1914
The	 third	 letter	 to	 be	 started	 today.	Your	 friend	 from	Breslau	 keeps
interfering	with	my	letters	to	you,	the	friend	whose	name	I	can	never
remember,	 not	 out	 of	 spite	 but	 nevertheless	 out	 of	 some	 kind	 of
necessity;	I	cannot	even	remember	what	he	looks	like,	though	I	have
seen	 a	 big	 enough	 picture	 of	 him	 hanging	 in	 your	 room.	 Him	 as	 a
person,	 however,	 I	 can	never	 forget;	 it’s	 partly	 your	 fault,	 you	have
said	too	little	about	him	specifically,	and	too	much	allusively.
I	had	no	word	from	you	today,	which	wouldn’t	matter;	what	does
matter	is	that	I	haven’t	had	a	single	calmly	written	page	from	you	for
nine	months.
Thank	you	for	your	letter	to	my	parents,	 it	put	their	minds	at	rest
completely.	 That	 letter	 made	 me	 realize	 once	 again	 what	 peculiar
language	you	people29	use.	While	cheerfully	scattering	around	words
like	 “terrific,	 gigantic,	 immense,	 nifty,”	 you	 prefer	 to	 avoid	 the
properly	descriptive	“very”	and	replace	it	by	the	indefinite	restrained
“rather.”
You	 won’t	 get	 a	 letter	 from	me	 on	 Sunday,	 F.;	 don’t	 be	 angry,	 I
don’t	 like	writing	 to	 you	at	home;	 as	 a	 stranger	 to	 the	 family	 I	was
able	to	do	it;	when	my	letters	were	made	fun	of,	the	fun	was	not,	after
all,	well	meant;	now	only	well-meant	fun	would	or	could	be	made	of
them,	and	this	is	just	what	I	would	deplore.
Your	 letter	 to	 my	 parents	 was	 disappointing	 to	 me	 above	 all	 on
account	of	the	date	of	your	visit.	What?	You	don’t	mean	to	come	until
the	5th?	Why	not	until	the	5th?	Surely	your	chief	is	back.	And	what
am	 I	 to	do	about	 the	apartment	which	with	great	difficulty	 is	being
kept	for	me	until	the	second?
What	melancholy	messages	I	send	you	today!	Allow	me	at	least	to
kiss	your	hand,	so	as	to	hide	my	face.



F.

April	25	[presumably	26],	1914
Dearest	 F.,	 there	 are	 two	 things	 you	 don’t	 mention,	 although	 you
know	that	for	your	sake	(leave	me	out	of	it	for	the	moment!),	simply
for	your	sake,	I	am	greatly	troubled	by	them	both.	About	one	of	them,
your	brother,	 I	have	even	refrained	from	asking	questions.	You	once
wrote	that	 I	would	be	told	all	about	 it	 in	Berlin;	 I	was	told	nothing,
merely	was	 given	 that	 one	 letter	 to	 read	which	made	me	 realize	 (I
mean	 the	 contents	 of	 the	 letter	made	me	 realize)	 how	much	 of	 this
subject,	insofar	as	it	concerns	you,	I	repeat,	only	insofar	as	it	concerns
you,	you	have	withheld	from	me.	But	you	now	continue	to	withhold
it.
The	other	is	about	your	friend	from	Breslau.	I	don’t	hesitate	to	ask

about	this	openly,	for	if	this	ghost	is	still	active	it	is	bound	to	reappear
even	 without	 being	 summoned;	 if	 no	 longer	 active,	 then	 even	 my
summons	won’t	have	the	power	to	raise	it.	Don’t	suggest	that	we	talk
about	 it,	 you	 were	 unable	 to	 keep	 promises	 of	 this	 kind	 before.
Discuss	it	frankly,	or	tell	me	frankly	why	you	are	unable	to	discuss	it.
There	 are	 so	 many	 things	 about	 which	 one	 cannot	 talk	 and
communicate	 clearly,	 because	 of	 one’s	 own	 or	 one’s	 hearer’s
inadequacy,	 so	 it	 is	 all	 the	 more	 one’s	 duty	 to	 make	 oneself	 clear
wherever	 clarity	 is	 possible.	 You	 are	 quite	 free	 to	 have	 the	 picture
hanging	in	your	room,	but	I	too	must	be	free	to	be	in	my	room.

F.

With	regard	to	the	superlatives,	you	have	slightly	misunderstood
my	 meaning.	 It’s	 not	 the	 expressions	 in	 themselves	 that	 are
peculiar;	 the	 peculiar	 thing	 is	 that	 on	 the	 one	hand	 you	people
choose	 these	 particular	 words—empty	 in	 their	 sheer	 immensity
(gasping	 girls	 seemed	 to	 disgorge	 them	 from	 tiny	 mouths	 like
huge	 rats)—while	 on	 the	 other	 hand	 you	 are	 in	 favor	 of	 dull,
rather	indefinite	words;	and	so	in	a	kind	of	gallop	you	do	not	in
fact	describe,	but	eschew	any	proper	description.
The	 visitors	 must	 be	 giving	 you	 a	 lot	 of	 trouble,	 but	 surely
some	 pleasure,	 too?	 To	 each	 his	 share:	 you	 are	 greeting	 the
guests,	I	the	ghosts.
I	am	receiving	plenty	of	congratulations,	 though	certainly	not



as	many	as	you.	 I	opened	 the	 first	 lot,	but	not	 the	 later	ones;	 if
they	are	destined	to	come	true	and	we	to	be	happy,	they	will	be
equally	effective	unread.	The	enclosed	postcard	is	for	your	aunt;
it	comes	from	that	man	she	professes	to	know.
So	you	are	 coming	on	Friday;	 I	 can	 take	 this	as	definite.	 It	 is
the	latest	date,	if	you	want	to	see	the	apartment.	It	is	beautiful;	if
the	weather	 is	 as	 lovely	when	you	 see	 it	 as	 it	 is	now,	 then	you
will	take	it;	if	not,	you	will	hesitate.	It	is	far	enough	out,	right	in
the	 open,	 surrounded	 by	 greenery,	 3	 rooms,	 2	 balconies,	 1
terrace,	1200	kronen,	a	lot	of	money,	actually	more	than	we	can
afford.	I	talk	as	though	I	have	a	clear	idea	of	what	we	can	afford.
You	wouldn’t	 like	 to	go	 to	Gmünd	 for	a	day?	 I	 should	 like	 to
very	much.
Send	me	your	 sister	Elsa’s	address!	Was	your	mother	 satisfied
with	my	 letter?	And	have	 [Brod’s]	Petticoat	Government	 and	 the
Werfel	arrived?

To	Grete	Bloch
April	26,	1914

Dear	Fräulein	Grete,	all	right,	let’s	leave	the	decision	open.	May	I,	at
every	moment	during	F.’s	stay,	be	allowed	the	hope	of	seeing	you.	So
far	 these	 hopes	 have	 been	 quite	 futile,	 let’s	 pray	 it	won’t	 be	 so	 this
time.	 F.	 still	 hasn’t	 written	 about	 Gmünd.	 She	 is	 supposed	 to	 be
arriving	on	the	1st	or	2nd,	of	course	I	shall	let	you	know	the	date.
So	you	are	definitely	going	to	Berlin.	Is	your	present	decision	due	to

good	news	or	bad?	The	decision	to	travel	together,	however,	won’t	be
left	open;	in	my	opinion	we	shall	definitely	travel	together.	I	do	look
forward	 to	 sitting	opposite	 you	 in	 the	 compartment,	 not	 in	order	 to
talk,	 for	 I	 can’t	 do	 that,	 but	 just	 to	 sit	 there,	 nodding,	 shaking	 my
head,	 squeezing	 your	 hand	 properly	 by	 way	 of	 greeting,	 and
altogether	being	at	ease.	Lovely	journey!
You	 are	 about	 to	 leave,	 so	 you	 can	 like	 Vienna.	 Don’t	 forget	 the

Grillparzer	 Room!	 Incidentally,	 I	 don’t	 believe	 that	 one’s	 sadness	 at
leaving	 is	 due	 to	 one	 having	 loved	 the	 thing	 one	 is	 leaving.	 One’s
sadness	is	probably	due	to	the	opposite.	One	feels	that	the	connections
are	 severed	 too	easily,	also	 that	others	part	 from	one	 too	easily;	 the
superficial	relationships	which	were	established	in	the	course	of	time
and	which,	because	they	have	not	been	closely	examined	during	that



time,	almost	seemed	to	represent	intimate	relationships,	now	prove	to
be	 as	 insignificant	 as	 they	 actually	 are.	 Sadly	 one	 remembers	 the
pseudo-relationships	 that	 were	 formed,	 and	 sadly	 one	 foresees	 the
pseudo-relationships	 that	 will	 be	 formed.	 Indeed,	 one	 needs	 both
freedom	 and	 dependence,	 but	 each	 in	 its	 own	 place,	 and	 one	 feels
very	uneasy	on	realizing	that	one	has	got	the	places	mixed	up.	It	has
often	happened	to	me;	it	doesn’t	matter,	rejoice	with	me	that	you	are
about	 to	 leave	Vienna.	What	did	your	brother	mean	by	 that	 remark
you	quoted?	It	is	a	strange	one.	And	who	are	the	other	rare	birds	who
are	 trying	 to	 dissuade	 you	 from	 going	 to	 Berlin?	How	 little	 I	 know
about	you!	And	how	much	I	should	like	to	know!	I	am	interested	even
in	the	visitor	you	had.
I	could	well	do	with	 the	advice	you	offer	me	but	 it	can	hardly	be
given	in	writing.	How	can	you	advise	me	about	an	apartment	without
having	seen	it?	And	how	can	you	advise	me	about	spending	my	few
kronen	 when	 it’s	 quite	 impossible	 for	 F.	 to	 manage	 on	 that?	 But
however	worried	I	may	be	in	other	respects,	this	doesn’t	worry	me	in
the	very	least.	I	lack	the	imagination.	Or	perhaps	the	pressure	of	other
worries	is	too	great	to	allow	one	more	to	slip	through.	As	for	the	rest,
I	have	never	had	so	 few	headaches.	And	you?	A	short	 time	ago	you
were	 still	 plagued	 by	 them,	 are	 they	 better?	 Have	 you	 ever	 tried	 a
vegetarian	 diet?	 And	 I	 expect	 you	 will	 hardly	 have	 time	 to	 read
Thürheim.	Will	you	be	going	to	Teplitz?

Kindest	regards,	yours,	Franz	K.

April	29,	1914
You	misunderstand	me,	F.,	I	am	not	in	the	least	interested	in	what	you
tell	me	about	your	friend	from	Breslau;	I’m	not	interested	in	his	name,
or	in	his	marriage;	indeed,	I’m	not	interested	in	him	at	all.
Well,	 you	 seem	 to	 have	 had	 some	 fairly	 satisfactory	 news	 about
your	brother.	I	am	glad	for	all	our	sakes.
I	had	expected	 that	by	now	you	would	have	been	able	 to	name	a
definite	 date	 for	 your	 arrival.	 If	 you	 don’t	 come	 on	 Friday	we	 shall
have	lost	one	of	the	apartments.	I	wouldn’t	want	to	be	responsible	for
taking	the	apartment	without	you,	for	the	things	you	might	like	about
it	would	have	 to	 compensate	 for	 the	disadvantages	 that	would	arise
from	your	point	of	view,	i.e.,	the	apartment	is	rather	a	long	way	from
the	center,	you	would	be	surrounded	by	Czechs,	etc.	So	try	and	make



it	possible	to	come.	I	shall	go	and	see	a	number	of	other	apartments
tomorrow	in	another,	perhaps	more	convenient	neighborhood,	so	that
you	 can	 then	 choose	 the	 most	 suitable	 without	 too	 much	 effort.
Yesterday	I	saw	a	3-room	apartment	for	only	700	kronen	right	in	the
center,	immediately	behind	the	museum	that	forms	the	top	end	of	the
Wenzelsplatz.	 The	 kind	 of	 apartment	 one	 sometimes	 inhabits	 in
nightmares.	On	 reaching	 the	 staircase	 one	 begins	 to	 struggle	with	 a
variety	of	smells;	one	has	to	enter	by	way	of	a	dark	kitchen,	a	crowd
of	 children	 crying	 in	 some	 corner,	 a	 barred	 semiopaque	 window,
vermin	 hiding	 in	 holes	waiting	 for	 night	 to	 fall.	 Life	 in	 this	 kind	 of
place	is	almost	inconceivable,	except	as	a	result	of	a	curse.	These	are
not	places	where	work	is	done,	work	is	done	elsewhere;	these	are	not
places	where	sins	are	committed,	sins	are	committed	elsewhere;	they
are	 simply	 places	 to	 live	 in—but	 even	 that	 is	 hardly	 possible.	 We
should	 not	 look	 at	 desirable	 apartments	 only—some	 time,	 together,
Felice,	we	should	see	this	kind	of	apartment	as	well.

F.

To	Grete	Bloch
April	29,	1914

What	are	you	tormenting	yourself	about,	dear	Fräulein	Grete?	And	in
such	breakneck	fashion?	How	can	you	say	you	haven’t	been	a	comfort
to	me,	haven’t	shown	me	continual	kindness—I	who,	in	my	relations
with	 you,	 always	 have	 the	 feeling	 that	 there	 are	 only	 two	 kinds	 of
pure,	 tearless	happiness,	 touching	 the	very	 limits	of	our	 strength:	 to
have	a	person	who	is	true	to	one,	to	whom	one	is	true;	and	secondly
to	 be	 true	 to	 oneself	 and	 spend	 oneself	 utterly,	 burn	 oneself	 up
without	leaving	any	ashes.
Your	letter	is	written	at	such	speed;	I	don’t	understand	it	all.	If	you
are	taken	on	in	Berlin,	 they	must	surely	give	you	a	chance	to	 install
yourself	there;	the	fact	that	your	family	lives	there	is	surely	no	one’s
business.	But	 if	you	have	 to	start	work	quite	so	soon,	and	especially
since	you	are	remaining	with	the	same	firm,	there	surely	can’t	be	any
great	 objection	 to	 your	 leaving	 Vienna	 sooner,	 say	 a	 week	 before
Whitsun.	And,	Fräulein	Grete,	 in	what	frame	of	mind	was	that	 letter
read,	not	written,	the	letter	that	is	supposed	to	have	said:	Stay	where
you	are——
However,	one	must	take	into	account	the	possibility	that	you	won’t



be	 in	 Berlin	 for	 Whitsun	 and	 that	 the	 person	 facing	 me	 in	 my
compartment	will	be	my	 father,	 to	his	 sorrow	and	mine.	Alas!	Alas!
And	in	Berlin	I	shall	have	to	go	through	the	reception	performance	all
alone	with	my	own	two	legs	and	hands!	Without	your	help!	(F.	will	be
busy	with	her	performance.)	Well,	I	shall	have	to	resign	myself	to	this.
And	 console	 myself	 with	 the	 thought	 that	 you	 will	 at	 last	 have
escaped	 from	 the	 provincialism	 and	 hopelessness	 of	 Vienna,	 will
rediscover	 your	 vitality	 and	 regain	 the	 natural	 pleasure	 of	 being
yourself.	 Perhaps	 your	 situation	 is	 essentially	 not	 so	 very	 different
from	mine	except	 that	 it	 came	 to	you	as	more	of	a	 surprise,	doesn’t
suit	you	at	all,	and	finally	will	have	to	be	gloriously	exploded	by	you.
The	 loss	 I	 suffer	by	your	probable	absence	 from	Berlin	at	Whitsun
could	be	turned	into	a	gain	by	the	fact	that	you	and	F.	will	now	meet,
after	all.	However,	I	still	don’t	know	for	certain	when	F.	is	coming.	I
assumed	she	was	coming	on	Friday,	now	I	am	doubtful	again.	I	had	a
letter	 yesterday	 in	which	 she	 said:	 “In	 the	meantime	Grete	wrote	 to
say	she	won’t	be	able	to	come	to	Prague	because	she	will	be	leaving
on	June	1st.	But	I	will	write	to	her	again	tomorrow.”	If	F.	weren’t	F.
you	should	have	a	letter	today	with	some	mention	of	Gmünd.	F.	still
hasn’t	said	anything	about	it	to	me.	In	any	case,	the	moment	I	know
for	certain	when	F.	is	coming	I’ll	send	you	a	telegram.	It	will	then	be
your	 turn	 to	 telegraph:	 “Coming,”	 and	 immediately	 I	 will	 run	 and
book	a	room	for	you	in	F.’s	hotel.
But	I	do	see	that	this	journey	would	be	a	confounded	nuisance	(here
on	Saturday,	back	on	Sunday,	there	would	be	no	other	way?),	not	to
mention	 the	 annoyances	 from	which	 I	 couldn’t	 protect	 you,	 at	 least
not	 entirely,	 and	 so	 it	 would	 be	 kinder	 on	my	 part	 to	 refrain	 even
from	asking	you.

Kindest	regards,	yours,	Franz	K.

Will	you	be	going	to	Teplitz?	Might	the	Berlin	firm	be	taking	part
in	the	exhibition	in	Prague?

To	Grete	Bloch
[End	of	April	1914]

Dear	Fräulein	Grete,	there	is	no	other	paper	in	the	house.	The	better-
quality	 paper	 has	 been	 used	 up,	 but	 this	 is	 just	 right	 for	 you;	 for	 I
really	don’t	want	to	write	letters	to	you,	but	for	a	few	minutes	come



as	close	to	you	as	these	hundreds	of	miles	will	permit.
Have	I	been	misunderstood?	No.	And	yet	you	don’t	want	to	come?
All	the	reasons	that	are	against	Gmünd	are	in	favor	of	Prague.	If	Frau
B[aucr]	 is	 not	 well	 disposed	 toward	 you—I	 myself	 have	 noticed
nothing	 of	 the	 kind—then	 this	 merely	 creates	 an	 additional	 bond
between	you	and	me,	but	it	doesn’t	present	an	obstacle	to	your	visit.	I
for	 my	 part	 would	 be	 very	 pleased	 if	 you	 came,	 and	 certainly	 so
would	 F.;	 she	 has	 already	 informed	 me	 of	 your	 visit	 in	 the	 most
enthusiastic	 terms.	 I	 still	 don’t	 know	 quite	 how	 to	 express	 it,	 but
sometimes	it	seems	to	me	almost	essential	that	you	should	be	present
when	F.	comes	to	my	place	for	the	first	time.	From	your	point	of	view,
of	course,	there	is	a	good	deal	to	be	said	against	it:	the	long	journey;
talking	 to	 strangers,	not	many,	nevertheless	a	 few;	and	other	minor,
unforeseeable	 things.	 I	 don’t	 want	 to	 force	 you,	 but	 I	 shall	 have	 to
force	myself	to	do	without	you.	F.	may	come	up	with	a	good	idea,	she
still	hasn’t	said	a	word	to	me	about	Gmünd;	nothing	will	prevent	me,
if	she	wants	to	go.
F.	writes	to	me	more	regularly	now,	even	if	not	much,	nevertheless
daily,	 except	 today,	 so	 far	 I	 have	 had	 no	 word	 today.	 Yesterday,
however

Enough,	 it’s	 late;	 incidentally,	 a	 few	hours	 ago,	 just	 as	 I	was	 in	 the
middle	of	 that	 last	 sentence,	a	 telegram	arrived	 from	F.,	as	 if	 at	 the
last	moment,	so	to	speak,	she	meant	to	stay	the	hand	that	had	written
a	kind	of	reproach.	It	was	too	late.

Kindest	regards,	yours,	Franz	K.

To	Grete	Bloch
[May	3,	1914]

Dear,	 dear	 Fräulein	 Grete,	 in	 the	 ridiculous	 haste	 that	 attends	 an
engaged	 couple	 being	 dragged	 from	one	 place	 to	 another,	 including
apartment	hunting.	But	it’s	impossible,	quite	impossible	for	me	not	to
send	you	a	word	of	greeting	today.	The	nicest	and	best	thing	among
the	nice	and	good	things	you	sent	is	the	picture	of	you.	I	realized	that
I	 had	 quite	 forgotten	 your	 face;	 it	 had	 wholly	 disintegrated	 in	 my
memory	since	those	bygone	days,	and	the	image	assembled	by	degrees
in	the	course	of	time	was	that	of	a	person	who	meant	so	much	to	me
that	I	had	imagined	I	could	forget	about	the	face	altogether.	And	now,



of	course,	confronted	with	the	picture,	this	isn’t	true	at	all.	I	should	be
so	pleased	if	I	were	to	get	a	snapshot	of	you;	if	it	were	to	be	one	only,
I	 should	choose	 the	one	of	you	sitting	with	 the	2	girls.	 I	enclose	my
twisted	mug	not	as	an	expression	of	thanks,	which	would	be	absurd,
but	from	an	unrelated	impulse.
No	more	today;	I	have	a	lot	to	tell	you,	to	complain	that	you	are	not

here,	to	be	glad	that	you	are	not	here.	And	since	these	mixed	feelings
would	have	prevailed	even	if	you	had	come,	I	am	really	very	sad	that
you	 didn’t,	 I	 should	 have	 begged	 you	 more.	 We	 telephoned	 you
yesterday	afternoon,	but	your	office	was	already	closed.
I’ll	write	tomorrow	or	the	day	after.

Yours,	Franz	K.

To	Grete	Bloch
[Presumably	May	5,	1914]

Dear	Fräulein	Grete,	I	now	have	the	pictures,	they	are	lying	in	front	of
me,	 the	one	with	 the	monument	 is	 the	best	 (you	 lean	 so	wearily	on
your	 neighbor?),	 the	 “lonely	 road”	 is	 characteristic,	 the	 others	 are
merely	aids,	no	help	at	all,	but	I	can	assure	you	they	are	all	very	dear
to	me.	Which	 lovely	park	are	you	 in?	At	 à	villa?	Rather	gay	on	 the
whole.	Are	these	girl	friends	of	yours?

Late,	 late.	F.	 left	 today.	 I’ll	write	more	tomorrow.	 I	am	not	unhappy
about	 the	 short	 pieces,	 did	 I	 say	 so?	 What	 made	 me	 unhappy	 was
merely	 that	 I	 was	 prevented	 from	 thanking	 you	 at	 once.	 But	 apart
from	that,	not	the	“happiest	of	bridegrooms,”	not	that,	not	that;	only
he	who	is	also	happiest	about	himself	is	the	happiest	of	bridegrooms.
No,	no.

More	tomorrow!	Yours,	Franz	K.

To	Grete	Bloch
May	7,	1914

Dear	 Fräulein	 Grete,	 whatever	 else	 I	 may	 be,	 I	 am	 certainly
absentminded;	 what	 I	 like	 best	 is	 to	 roam	 around	 the	 parks	 and
streets,	one	hand	clasped	in	the	other,	come	home,	eat	some	of	your
marvelous	fruit,	rush	off	again,	look	for	an	apartment,	rent	a	bad	one,
fear	I	shall	never	get	rid	of	it,	the	one	I	like	is	invariably	the	last	but



one;	I	love	the	last	but	one	before	I	can	get	used	to	the	last	one,	so	I
practically	 have	 to	 be	 dragged	 from	 the	 doorstep.	 I	 was	 virtually
shoved	out	of	the	first	and	best	by	everybody,	including	myself.

More	failed	attempts	to	get	rid	of	the	last	apartment.	Apart	from	the
two	places’	utterly	different	atmosphere,	both	good	and	bad,	they	are
exact	 opposites	 in	 character.	 The	 one	 I	 have	 taken	 revolves	 in	 a	¾
circle	around	the	kitchen;	the	one	I	want	to	take	and	have	known	for
a	 long	time	faces	east	 in	 its	whole	 length.	Shall	 I	 succeed?	The	final
attempt	 is	 about	 to	 be	 made.	 You	 will	 hear	 the	 result	 in	 this	 very
letter.	Exciting,	isn’t	it?
Now,	 dear	 Fräulein	 Grete,	 what	 am	 I	 to	 tell	 you?	 Fundamentally
nothing	much	has	happened.	Felice	looks	well,	ah	yes,	she	is	in	good
spirits,	and	while	here	seems	to	have	felt	quite	at	ease.	My	family	has
taken	a	great	liking	to	her,	rather	more	than	I	like.	There	hasn’t	been
the	 slightest	 change	 in	 F.’s	 relationship	 to	 you	 since	 you	 were	 in
Berlin	 together.	 You	 say	 you	 are	 very	 observant;	 in	 this	 case	 you
weren’t,	 or	 you	 wouldn’t	 have	 been	 surprised	 by	 F.’s	 silence.	 F.’s
silence	as	 such	can’t	be	 judged,	 it	must	be	 taken	as	an	 indication	of
her	 character.	 If	 we	 love	 her,	 we	 must	 love	 her	 in	 her	 entirety,
whether	we	like	it	or	not,	and	we	do.	But	I	won’t	say	any	more	on	this
subject,	there’s	no	end	to	it.	Not	for	your	sake,	you	know	that,	but	for
my	own.

Luckily	 I	 have	 got	 rid	 of	 the	 apartment	 that	 revolves	 around	 the
kitchen,	 but	 I	 haven’t	 taken	 the	 other	 one	 yet,	 the	 immensely	 high,
beautiful	 one.	 Many	 drawbacks:	 shabby	 wallpaper,	 high	 rent,	 no
servant’s	 room,	 only	 one	 door	 to	 each	 room,	 etc.,	 and	 while	 I	 was
considering	 all	 this,	 some	 demon	 in	 the	 apartment	 next	 door	 starts
playing	 a	 piano	 with	 such	 vigor	 that	 it	 echoes	 through	 the	 empty
rooms.	There’s	nothing	I	dread	more	than	music	anywhere	around	the
apartment.	So	once	again	I	walked	slowly	down	the	100	or	200	steps.
What	has	been	happening	with	you?	Or	was	I	mistaken	in	thinking
from	your	last	letter	that	something	special	had	happened?	Above	all,
the	most	important	thing	for	me:	Will	you	be	in	Berlin	at	Whitsun	or
before	Whitsun?	Will	you	be	going	to	Teplitz	before	then?
It’s	 striking	9,	 I	must	be	off	 to	 the	 station	with	 this	 letter,	 though
there	is	nothing	in	it.	Forgive	me,	I	am	in	a	slight	whirl	but	have	no
wish	to	escape	from	it;	 it’s	better	 to	go	around	in	circles	and	dizzily
hang	one’s	head,	better	that	than	to	lie	flat	on	the	floor.



Yours,	Franz	K.

To	Grete	Bloch
May	8,	1914

Dear	Fräulein	Grete,	it	depresses	me	to	see	how	much	you	suffer	from
the	incomprehensibility	of	my	moods,	or	rather	from	your	own	innate
kindness.	Certainly	I	should	have	every	reason	to	be	happy,	and	F.	is
certainly	 the	 major	 part	 of	 this	 happiness.	 A	 certain	 kind	 of
incomprehensibility—and	mine	is	of	this	kind—can	become	repugnant
by	 its	 very	 incomprehensibility;	 but	 this	 must	 never	 happen	 where
you	 are	 concerned.	 Accept	 my	 reasons	 without	 explanation,	 which
should	be	all	the	easier	when	I	add	that	quite	possibly	it	will	all	turn
out	for	the	best.	This	would	even	agree	with	the	basic	rules	of	my	life
which	I	have	learned	from	experience.	Because	so	far	I	have	achieved
everything	I	set	out	to	achieve,	not	at	once,	never	without	detours,	in
fact	usually	on	the	return	journey,	always	with	the	utmost	effort,	and,
as	far	as	one	could	judge,	almost	at	the	last	moment.	Not	too	late,	but
very	nearly	 too	 late,	 invariably	with	 the	 last	 pounding	of	 the	heart.
Nor	have	 I	 ever	achieved	 the	whole	of	what	 I	 aimed	at;	 in	 fact,	 the
whole	was	usually	no	longer	there;	and	even	if	it	had	been,	I	couldn’t
have	coped	with	all	of	it;	nevertheless,	I	did	acquire	a	large	part	of	it
and	usually	 the	most	 important	 part.	 These	 rules	 that	 one	 discovers
for	oneself	are	quite	meaningless	in	themselves,	of	course;	yet	they	are
not	 without	meaning	 for	 understanding	 the	 character	 of	 the	 person
who	 has	 found	 them,	 especially	 since	 once	 found	 they	 assume	 over
him	a	kind	of	physical	dominance.—In	any	case	you	will	be	able	 to
observe	our	happiness	or	unhappiness,	 for	we	have	decided—and	on
no	 account	 must	 you	 resist—that	 once	 we	 are	 married	 you	 are	 to
come	and	 live	with	us	 for	 some	 time	 (and	 from	 the	very	beginning;
since	you	have	no	vacation	now,	you	will	get	it	this	winter).	If	I	take
the	apartment	I	mentioned	in	my	last	letter,	we	would	have	plenty	of
room.	We	shall	lead	a	pleasant	life	and,	in	order	to	test	me,	you	shall
hold	my	hand	and	I,	 in	order	to	thank	you,	must	be	allowed	to	hold
yours.
But	the	way	they	are	behaving	toward	you	at	the	office!	It’s	really
disgraceful.	You	should	have	had	a	letter	from	me	today.	Well,	at	least
they	are	not	making	it	hard	for	you	to	leave.	Unless	the	girls	will	do
so;	you	seem	to	have	friends	among	them.



As	 for	Hardt,30	 I	 can	make	2	 statements	 straight	off.	 First,	 I	 don’t
like	him.	Earlier	on,	and	this	story,	which	I	haven’t	read,	dates	back	to
his	 earlier	 days,	 he	 wrote	 some	 good	 things;	 he	 also	 translated
Flaubert’s	3	 stories	extremely	well,	at	 least	 so	 I	 thought	at	 the	 time.
But	 later	 he	wrote	 disgraceful	 stuff,	 and	 continues	 to	 do	 so.	On	 the
whole	I	had	no	wish	to	read	anything	by	him.	The	second	statement	is
that	I	value	everything	you	take	up,	and	that	everything	coming	from
you	thereby	acquires	value	for	me.
Is	 a	 family	 evening	 another	 of	 those	 special	 institutions?	 So	 far	 I

knew	only	about	the	reception,	and	that	takes	place	on	Whitmonday.
Kindest	regards,	yours,	Franz	K.

Incidentally,	do	you	read	French?	And	the	Grillparzer	Room?	And
Thürheim?

[IN	THE	MARGIN]	Better	write	to	me	at	the	office.	At	home	the	letter	on	the
table	waits	in	vain	for	hours.

To	Grete	Bloch
May	12,	1914

Dear	Fräulein	Grete,	so	tired?	And	you	intend	to	continue	for	another
3	weeks	in	this	makeshift	fashion	which	prevents	you	from	sleeping?
Surely	 that	 is	 far	 too	 considerate	 toward	 the	 landlady	 and	 too
inconsiderate	toward	yourself.	It	makes	me	sorry,	and	annoyed.
It	was	very	kind	of	you	 to	go	 to	 the	museum.	 I	did	not	 expect	 to

learn	 anything	 new	 (although	 I	 actually	 did),	 but	 I	 felt	 the	 need	 to
know	you	had	been	to	the	Grillparzer	Room	and	that	thus	a	physical
tie	had	also	been	established	between	me	and	the	room.	One	doesn’t
get	more	 than	 that	 even	 by	 going	 oneself,	 at	 least	 not	much	more,
especially	 in	view	of	 the	exhibits	having	been	moved	around.	 Is	 the
picture	you	sent	me	that	of	 the	actual	room	or	 the	room	at	 the	City
Hall?	A	lovely	room,	in	any	case,	pleasant	to	live	in,	pleasant	to	sleep
in,	 in	 an	 armchair	 at	 sunset.	 Incidentally,	 an	 old	 and	 unattainable
desire:	to	sit	at	a	table	in	front	of	a	large	window,	to	have	a	wide-open
view	 from	 the	 window,	 and	 to	 sleep	 peacefully	 at	 sunset	 without
feeling	 the	burden	 imposed	by	 the	 light	and	 the	view,	 to	breathe	 in
undisturbed	 peace.	 What	 longings!	 And	 how	 stupidly	 expressed!
That’s	not	the	way	it	is.



Incidentally,	after	[reading]	“The	Poor	Musician,”	did	you	yourself
have	 the	 wish	 to	 see	 the	 room?	 He	 really	 was	 a	 terrible	 man;	 if
misfortune	could	detach	 itself	 from	us	and	go	about	 freely,	 it	would
be	 like	him,	every	misfortune	would	 look	 like	him,	he	was	palpable
misfortune	 personified.	 An	 incident	 from	 his	 diaries	 or	 letters:	 the
engagement	had	been	broken	off	ages	ago,	only	the	most	half-witted
relatives	 still	 believed	 in	 some	 faint	 possibility	 of	 a	 marriage,	 by
which	 time	Katharina	was	well	over	30.	One	evening	G.	goes	 to	 see
the	 sisters,	 as	 he	does	most	 evenings;	K.	 is	 particularly	 nice	 to	 him,
partly	 out	 of	 pity	 he	 makes	 her	 sit	 on	 his	 lap—the	 two	 sisters	 are
presumably	walking	around	the	room—whereupon	he	discovers,	and
later	writes	it	down,	that	he	feels	utterly	indifferent	to	K.,	that	at	the
time	 he	 had	 had	 to	 force	 himself,	 that	 he	would	 have	 been	 glad	 to
have	experienced	the	slightest	emotion,	but	that	he	had	no	alternative
but	to	keep	her	on	his	lap	and	then	after	a	while	to	extricate	himself
again.	Incidentally,	 it	wasn’t	 just	pity	that	made	him	take	her	on	his
lap,	it	was	almost	a	test;	worse,	he	foresaw	the	consequences,	yet	did
it.31
You	did	get	my	last	2	letters?	I	want	to	know	where	you	will	be	for
Whitsun;	 you	 asked	what	 day	 the	 reception	 is	 to	 take	 place,	 which
seemed	to	suggest	that	you	might	somehow	be	able	to	come	after	all.
If	only	you	would!
Imagine,	I	still	haven’t	got	an	apartment.	I	am	beginning	to	toy	with
the	 idea	 of	 renting	 no	more	 than	 a	 2-room	 apartment	 (in	 town	 all
apartments	are	very	expensive,	but	F.	should	live	in	town,	at	least	to
begin	with).	What	do	you	think?
I	have	the	manuscript	of	a	new	novel	by	Ernst	Weiss,32	as	fiery	and
good	as	The	Galley,	even	better	and	effortlessly	consistent.	Would	you
want	to	read	it,	and	in	any	case	would	you	have	the	time	to	do	so	in
the	near	future?	Hardly.—Once	again:	Do	you	read	French?

Kindest	regards,	yours,	Franz	K.

To	Grete	Bloch
May	16,	1914

Dear	Fräulein	Grete,	your	 toothache	obviously	means	 that	 in	Vienna
you	are	not	to	be	spared	even	this	greatest	of	evils,	but	that	from	the
moment	 of	 departure	 all	 shall	 be	 better.	What	 other	meaning	 could
your	 toothache	 have?	 And	 why	 should	 you	 be	 meaninglessly



tormented?	At	 this	moment	 I,	 too,	am	well	aware	of	 the	meaning	of
insomnia	 and	 “expansion	 of	 the	 head,”	 an	 awareness	 that	 I	 seem
incapable	of	losing;	so	far,	however,	I	may	not	have	suffered	the	very
direst	 form	of	 toothache,	and	 I	 read	about	 it	 in	your	 letter	with	 the
utter	perplexity	of	a	 schoolboy.	How,	 in	 fact,	do	you	attend	 to	your
teeth?	 Do	 you	 brush	 them	 after	 each	 meal?	 (Alas,	 I	 am	 now
addressing	 the	 lady	who,	 thanks	 to	 toothache,	 disregards	 politeness
and	formality.)	What	do	the	infernal	dentists	say?	Once	in	their	hands,
one	 has	 to	 taste	 the	 misery	 to	 the	 bitter	 end.	 I	 think	 F.,	 with
practically	 an	 entire	 mouthful	 of	 gold-capped	 teeth,	 has	 relatively
little	trouble.	Could	you	not	 achieve	 this	 state	 in	a	 like	manner?	To
tell	 the	 truth,	 this	 gleaming	 gold	 (a	 really	 hellish	 luster	 for	 this
inappropriate	spot)	so	scared	me	at	first	that	I	had	to	lower	my	eyes	at
the	sight	of	F.’s	teeth	and	the	grayish	yellow	porcelain.	After	a	time,
whenever	I	could,	I	glanced	at	it	on	purpose	so	as	not	to	forget	it,	to
torment	myself,	 and	 finally	 to	 convince	myself	 that	 all	 this	 is	 really
true.	 In	 a	 thoughtless	moment	 I	 even	asked	F.	 if	 it	 didn’t	 embarrass
her.	Of	course,	it	didn’t—fortunately.	But	now	I	have	become	almost
entirely	 reconciled,	 and	 not	merely	 from	 habit	 (in	 fact	 I	 hadn’t	 the
time	to	acquire	a	visual	habit).	I	now	no	longer	wish	these	gold	teeth
gone,	but	that’s	not	quite	the	right	expression,	for	I	actually	never	did
wish	 them	 gone.	 It’s	 rather	 that	 they	 now	 strike	 me	 as	 almost
becoming,	 most	 suitable,	 and—this	 is	 not	 unimportant—a	 very
definite,	 genial,	 ever-present,	 visually	 undeniable	 human	 blemish
which	brings	me	perhaps	closer	to	F.	than	could	a	healthy	set	of	teeth,
also	 horrible	 in	 its	 way.—This	 is	 not	 a	 bridegroom	 defending	 his
bride’s	 teeth:	 rather,	 it’s	 someone	 incapable	 of	 expressing	 what	 he
wants	to	say,	who	at	the	same	time	wants	to	encourage	you,	if	there	is
no	other	way,	 and	only	 if	 there	 isn’t,	 to	do	 something	drastic	 about
relieving	your	pain.	But	this	too	it	may	be	better	to	postpone	until	you
get	to	Berlin.
The	appearance	of	my	handwriting	must	be	excused	by	the	fact	that
two	days	ago	I	cut	my	right	thumb	very	severely,	filled	a	small	bucket
with	my	blood,	and	am	now	treating	the	thumb	according	to	natural
methods—no	plaster	or	bandage,	as	a	 result	of	which	 the	process	of
healing	 is	 10	 times	 as	 slow	 but	 100	 times	 more	 effective:	 no
inflammation,	no	swelling,	a	veritable	feast	for	the	eye.
Perhaps	 I	 had	 better	 not	 send	 you	 Weiss’s	 novel	 while	 you	 are
moving.	 Incidentally,	 you	 seem	 to	 have	misunderstood:	 it’s	 only	 the
manuscript,	 the	book	presumably	won’t	appear	until	 the	autumn.	Of



course,	if	you	are	very	anxious	to	have	it,	I	will	send	it	at	once.	So	I
shan’t	see	you	at	Whitsun,	but	perhaps	there	will	be	another	chance.
My	Madrid	uncle	is	coming	on	a	visit	early	in	June,	I	shall	probably
go	to	Berlin	again	with	him,	though	for	one	Sunday	only;	so	I	shall	see
you	then,	will	also	introduce	you	to	Dr.	Weiss,	agreed?
Have	 now	 got	 an	 apartment.	 3	 rooms,	morning	 sun,	 in	midtown,

gas,	electric	light,	maid’s	room,	bathroom,	1300	kronen.	These	are	the
advantages.	 The	 disadvantages	 are:	 4th	 floor,	 no	 elevator,	 looks	 out
onto	a	dreary	and	rather	noisy	street.	Well,	you	will	be	obliged	(since
you	 accepted	 the	 invitation,	 for	 which	 I	 kiss	 your	 hand)	 to	 get	 to
know	it	all	very	well.

Kindest	regards,	yours,	Franz	K.

[IN	 THE	MARGIN]	Is	 it	all	right	to	send	Muzzi	a	picture	book?	How	old	 is
she?

To	Grete	Bloch
May	17,	1914

Dear	Fräulein	Grete,	so	what	only	yesterday	I	took	to	be	no	more	than
passing	 trouble	 has	 got	 so	 bad!	 You	 are	 at	 home,	 in	 bed?	 What
treatment	are	you	having?	Pain,	of	course?	Medicine	knows	no	better
than	 to	 treat	 pain	 with	 pain,	 which	 is	 then	 called	 “fighting	 the
disease.”
I	didn’t	get	your	letter	until	today;	yesterday	was	a	holiday	here,33

there	was	only	one	delivery,	 otherwise	 I	 should	of	 course	have	 sent
the	 manuscript	 before	 now.	 Now	 I	 shall	 send	 it	 tomorrow.	 Though
with	doubts	as	to	whether	the	pain	and	the	novel	are	compatible.	But
it	is	too	awful	to	have	a	mouth	full	of	pain	and	to	have	to	spend	hour
after	hour	in	this	state.	Do	your	2	friends	come	to	see	you,	and	has	the
makeshift	accommodation	been	redressed	in	view	of	your	condition?
My	chief	has	just	gone	to	Vienna	for	a	fortnight	on	some	inquiry;	I

should	 like	 to	have	written	messages	 for	you	on	his	back	and	made
him	march	up	and	down	Biber-	as	well	as	Glasergasse	several	times	a
day.	But	this	would	have	been	pointless	just	now,	for	you	are	at	home
and	only	the	maid	could	have	told	you	that	there	was	a	man	walking
up	and	down	the	street	with	messages	for	you	on	his	back.

It’s	 late.	 Imagine,	 today	 for	 the	 first	 time	 for	 ages	 I	 slept	 the	whole



afternoon,	better	 than	 for	 the	 last	300	nights.	 I	 sleep	abominably	at
night.
About	the	manuscript	there	is	one	thing	I	want	to	add	(not	for	you,
for	that	would	be	unnecessary,	but	to	carry	out	my	obligation	to	Dr.
Weiss):	you	are	not	to	lend	it	to	anyone.
Kind	 regards	 and	 best	wishes	 for	 a	 speedier	 recovery	 from	all	 ills
than	anyone	has	ever	experienced	before!

Yours,	Franz	K.

To	Grete	Bloch
May	18,	1914

Dear	Fräulein	Grete,	with	regard	to	your	toothache	which	fortunately
has	gone	by	now—so	that	it’s	safe	for	me	to	talk	about	it,	and	safe	for
you	 to	 listen—you	 can’t	wrest	my	 rights	 from	me,	 though	of	 course
it’s	 always	 true	 to	 say	 that	 to	 every	 sick	 person	 every	 healthy	 one
appears	 like	 an	 imbecile,	 and	 in	 fact	 behaves	 like	 an	 imbecile.	 This
applies	particularly	to	doctors	who	are	obliged	to	behave	in	this	way
professionally.	 However,	 there	 is	 no	 doubt	 in	my	mind	 that	 a	 draft
doesn’t	 cause	 toothache	 in	 healthy	 teeth.	 Healthy	 teeth	 don’t	 even
begin	 to	 feel	 well	 until	 they	 are	 exposed	 to	 a	 draft.	 And	 if	 the
deterioration	of	the	teeth	wasn’t	actually	due	to	inadequate	care,	then
it	was	due,	as	with	me,	to	eating	meat.	One	sits	at	table	laughing	and
talking	 (for	me	at	 least	 there	 is	 the	 justification	 that	 I	neither	 laugh
nor	 talk),	 and	 meanwhile	 tiny	 shreds	 of	 meat	 between	 the	 teeth
produce	 germs	 of	 decay	 and	 fermentation	 no	 less	 than	 a	 dead	 rat
squashed	between	two	stones.
Meat	is	the	one	thing	that	is	so	stringy	that	it	can	be	removed	only
with	great	difficulty,	and	even	 then	not	at	once	and	not	completely,
unless	one’s	teeth	are	like	those	of	a	beast	of	prey—pointed,	set	wide
apart,	designed	for	the	purpose	of	tearing	meat	to	shreds.
It’s	no	good,	however.	You	still	haven’t	been	to	Opolzergasse34	(that
is	 the	name,	 I	 think),	 and	are	not	 going	 even	now,	 at	 the	 season	of
fresh	 vegetables.	 When	 it’s	 an	 impersonal	 matter	 such	 as	 the
Grillparzer	Room,	you	are	kind	and	do	 it.	But	when	 it	concerns	you
personally,	you	are	not	kind	and	don’t	do	it.
I	 liked	 the	 idea	 of	 you	 forcing	 your	 way	 into	 the	 Lichtenstein
Gallery.35	 For	 it	 shows	 that	 you	possess	 sound	and,	 in	 view	of	 your
character	 (I	 am	 being	 entirely	 objective,	 am	 not	 judging	 from	 my



point	 of	 view)	 an	 undoubtedly	 well-founded	 self-confidence,	 for
undoubtedly	you	would	do	nothing	if	it	were	ill	founded.	As	it	is,	you
are	 overwary	 of	 yourself.	 But	 on	 this	 occasion	 you	 said	 to	 yourself
that	the	closing	of	the	gallery	was	an	injustice	to	you	personally,	that
you,	even	you	alone,	have	the	right	to	see	it,	and	so	you	insisted	upon
this	right.	For	myself	I	don’t	know	if	I	should	have	been	capable	of	it;
for	others,	yes.	Not	 that	 I	mightn’t	have	been	capable	of	persuading
the	man	to	let	me	in,	but	the	entire	train	of	thought	that	leads	to	this
man	 could	 not	 have	 developed	 in	 me,	 at	 least	 not	 without	 gaps.
Accordingly	my	situation	on	the	whole	must	be	worse	than	yours.
I	sent	the	novel	[The	Struggle]	off	today.	To	your	home.	You	needn’t
be	afraid	of	Dr.	Weiss;	if	there	were	anything	to	be	afraid	of	there,	I
myself	would	have	detected	it	by	now.	But	I	haven’t	found	anything.
He	 is	 a	 very	 nice,	 very	 trustworthy,	 in	 some	 ways	 (though	 only	 in
some)	 a	 very	 discerning	 person,	 and	 at	 opportune	 moments
wonderfully	 lively.	 F.’s	 enemy,	 incidentally.	 For	 your	 sake	 I	 don’t
hesitate	 to	 tear	 up	 (that’s	 exaggerated,	 the	 picture	 can	 be	 detached
quite	easily)	a	Fischer	catalogue,	and36	 send	you	a	picture	of	Weiss.
He	 hasn’t	 got	 such	 staring	 eyes;	 eyes	 accustomed	 to	 pince-nez	 open
wide	with	terror	when	the	pince-nez	are	removed.

Kindest	regards,	yours,	Franz	K.

May	19,	1914
The	weather	 is	 lovely	 here	 too,	 unfortunately	 one	 doesn’t	make	 the
best	of	it,	doesn’t	lie	in	the	woods	as	one	really	ought	to;	on	the	other
hand,	 one	 also	 doesn’t	make	 the	worst	 of	 it	 by	 spending	 a	 precious
Sunday	afternoon	 indoors	with	Aunt	Emilie37	 conferring	about	one’s
trousseau.	 If	 the	 completion	 of	 the	 trousseau	were	 expedited	 in	 this
way,	 or	 the	 occasion	 for	 its	 use	 brought	 nearer,	 then	 indeed	 no
Sunday	afternoon	would	be	too	precious,	but	since	this	isn’t	so——
This	weather	also	makes	 the	drawbacks	 to	our	apartment—which,
however,	 I	 have	 definitely	 taken—particularly	 obvious,	 and	 the
necessity	 for	 moving	 next	 summer	 almost	 inevitable.	 It	 may	 be
perfectly	all	right	in	the	winter:	it	is	between	houses,	shut	in,	warm,
yet	 gets	 plenty	 of	 sun	 and	 air.	 But	 at	 other	 times	 of	 the	 year	 it	 is
rather	gloomy	around	there,	nothing	green	outside	the	window,	just	a
rather	noisy,	rather	dreary	street;	although	it	is	situated	in	an	almost
squarelike	 opening,	 nevertheless	 one	 can	 see	 and	 be	 seen	 by	 the



people	opposite.	As	a	result	a	piece	of	furniture,	at	any	rate	for	the	2
rooms	 overlooking	 the	 street,	 will	 be	 necessary,	 which	 otherwise
wouldn’t	have	been.	What	is	it?	(Exercise	in	ingenuity.)
I	shall	get	hold	of	the	plans,	even	though	my	last	drawing	is	wholly

reliable.	 Their	 outward	 appearance	must	 in	 no	way	 deter	 you	 from
studying	 and	 becoming	 familiar	 with	 them.	 Just	 try	 pacing	 the
outlined	rooms,	leaning	out	of	the	window,	etc.,	and	you	will	get	an
absolutely	clear	idea	of	the	place.	You	would	get	an	even	clearer	idea,
however,	 if	 you	 were	 to	 take	 a	 little	 trip	 to	 Prague	 and	 see	 the
apartment	for	yourself.
Nothing	 is	going	 to	be	revealed	about	 the	state	of	my	 finger.	This

you	must	try	to	discover	from	my	handwriting.	Nevertheless,	I	could
write	to	your	mother	by	now,	and	it	is	silly	to	keep	postponing	it.
One	question	 in	confidence	 (in	confidence	vis-à-vis	your	 family	as

well	as	mine):	I	should	like	Ottla,	who	knows	nothing	of	my	plan,	no
one	else	knows	of	 it	 either,	 to	go	 to	Berlin	 sooner,	perhaps	 even	on
Sunday.	After	all,	she	ought	to	get	some	pleasure	from	the	trip;	but	if
she	 doesn’t	 go	 until	 Thursday,	 and	 has	 to	 leave	 again	 at	 latest	 on
Monday,	and	on	top	of	that	has	to	take	my	parents’	place	at	the	shop
every	day	during	the	whole	of	June,	it	would	really	be	too	negligible	a
pleasure.	 (Nor	 will	 she	 be	 able	 to	 come	 again	 for	 the	 wedding.)	 I
wonder	 if	 it	 would	 somehow	 be	 possible	 to	 find	 some	 nonworking
relative	or	friend	of	the	same	age	who	could	spare	her	a	few	hours	a
day,	or	give	her	directions	as	to	how,	both	profitably	and	pleasantly,
to	 spend	 the	 day	 alone?	 Staying	 at	 the	 hotel	 and	 all	 the	 rest	 of	 it
certainly	would	not	 present	 any	particular	 difficulties.	 The	demands
on	 her	 self-reliance	would	 not	 be	 unduly	 great	 and	 rather	 good	 for
her.	Well,	this	is	the	situation,	and	it	is	for	you	alone	to	decide,	which
is	all	the	easier	because,	should	you	foresee	too	many	difficulties,	the
failure	 to	 carry	 out	 my	 plan	 would	 disappoint	 no	 one	 (except	 me
perhaps	 for	 a	moment),	 since	 no	 one	 has	 heard	 of	my	 plan.	At	 any
rate	answer	immediately.

Kindest	regards,	Franz

If	 you	 think	 the	 thing	 is	 feasible,	 you	 would	 have	 to	 send	 an
express	letter,	for	Thursday	is	a	holiday	here.

[IN	THE	LEFT-HAND	MARGIN	ON	THE	FIRST	PAGE]	You	have	forgotten	about	the	B.Z.
[Berliner	Zeitung].38



To	Grete	Bloch

May	21,	1914
Not	 valerian	 tea,	 dear	 Fräulein	 Grete,	 please.	 First	 rule	 of	 natural
therapy:	“All	that’s	bad	is	really	bad.”	Although	sleeping	badly	is	also
bad,	and	being	awake	after	 sleeping	badly	 is	worse	 (that’s	how	 it	 is
almost	every	day),	at	least	one	isn’t	actually	responsible	for	it	while	it
lasts;	 it	 is	 one’s	 burden	 and	 one	 bears	 it.	 But	 deliberately	 to	 drink
valerian	tea,	and	while	drinking	it	possibly	even	staring	into	the	cup,
with	the	twin	hopes	that	it	will	soon	be	empty	and	will	do	some	good,
surely	 that	 is	degrading.	 I	 sleep	badly	not	because	 there	 is	 too	 little
valerian	tea	in	my	body;	there	are	100	reasons	why	I	sleep	badly,	but
this	one	reason	certainly	does	not	apply.
I	meant	to	tell	you	this	the	other	day	but	forgot	about	it.	Imagine,
when	 F.	 was	 here	 I	 discovered	 by	 chance	 the	 main	 cause	 of	 the
suspicion	I	harbored	against	you.	(Incidentally,	the	suspicion	couldn’t
have	been	bad	in	any	way	since	it	was	the	beginning	of	something	so
very	good	for	me.)	The	main	cause	was	your	furs.	I	didn’t	know	it	at
the	 time.	 I	 have	 already	 told	 you	 that,	 owing	 to	 my	 preconceived
ideas	of	business	efficiency,	I	imagined	you	all	wrong;	I	was	expecting
to	 meet	 a	 big,	 strong,	 rather	 older	 girl.	 Nothing	 was	 right;
nevertheless,	my	preconceived	 ideas	 could	have	adjusted	 themselves
to	reality.	But	it	was	mainly	your	furs,	as	I	now	know,	that	prevented
this.	 It	was	not	a	boa;	 I	believe	 this	garment	 is	 known	as	a	 stole	or
something	like	that.	It	doesn’t	suit	you,	or	rather	I	failed	to	notice	that
it	didn’t	suit	you,	I	just	didn’t	like	it.	And	at	first	sight	it	struck	me	as
so	conspicuous	 there,	at	 the	entrance	 to	 the	hotel.	Moreover,	 I	have
always	felt	a	definite	distaste	for	furs	treated	in	this	manner	(stretched
skins	with	a	 silk	 lining	underneath).	Perhaps	 it	has	 something	 to	do
with	 the	 notion	 that	 nomadic	 hunters	 may	 wear	 their	 skins	 in	 this
way,	 though	 not	 lined	 with	 silk.	 I	 also	 associate	 it	 with	 an	 idea	 of
poverty	and	artificiality,	 this	garment	with	 fur	on	 top	and	mere	 silk
underneath,	although	of	course	I	realize	that	the	whole	thing	can	be
very	expensive	and	that	in	any	case	it’s	impossible	for	fur	to	be	both
above	and	below	in	this	type	of	thing.	But	just	this	flat-surface	way	of
treating	 fur	 is	 distasteful	 to	 me;	 the	 sight	 of	 this	 flattened	 object
makes	me	ill	at	ease,	and	has	worried	me	a	great	deal	in	the	past	with
my	 sisters.—And	 it	 took	 a	 long	 time	 for	 my	 idea	 of	 your	 furs	 to
become	divorced	from	my	idea	of	you.	In	the	days	before	we	started



writing	to	each	other,	I	kept	seeing	you	wrapped	in	this	fur,	you	were
playing	with	the	ends	(its	very	mobility	and	flexibility	made	it	all	the
worse),	one	of	which	you	held	over	your	mouth	on	account	of	the	fog.
I	 remember	my	 sigh	 of	 relief	 on	 seeing	 you	 at	 the	 station	 in	 a	 nice
traveling	 coat,	 at	 last	 without	 furs,	 and	 you	 actually	 looked	 freer,
cleaner,	brighter.	But	by	then	it	was	too	 late.—Today,	however,	you
could	be	wrapped	in	500	of	these	furs	and	I	would	venture	to	relieve
you	of	them	all.

Franz	K.

[IN	 THE	 LOWER	MARGIN	OF	 THE	 FIRST	 PAGE]	For	various	reasons	which	I	shall	 tell
you	about	later,	I	am	very	anxious	to	hear	your	impressions	of	the
Struggle.	Didn’t	you	intend	to	write	a	few	lines	to	Dr.	Weiss?

May	22,	1914
I	am	committed	inasmuch	as	I	intend	to	mail	this	letter	tomorrow	no
matter	what	you	say	 in	your	 letter	of	 tomorrow.	Should	there	be	no
letter,	then	I	won’t	mail	this	one,	either.
What	 I	 intend	 to	 say	 might	 be	 attributed	 to,	 though	 in	 no	 way
caused	 by,	 either	 your	 silence	 concerning	 my	 sister’s	 trip,	 or	 your
temporary	silence	in	general,	or	finally	to	certain	things	in	your	recent
letters.	My	sister’s	trip	is	of	such	minor	importance	that	a	simple	but
prompt	 No	 on	 your	 part	 would	 have	 dealt	 with	 it	 admirably.
However,	what	I	intend	to	say	is	quite	irrespective	of	all	this,	mainly
because,	over	and	above	all	this,	it	is	of	general	importance	to	us.
Needless	 to	 say,	 when	 sitting	 here	 alone	 at	 my	 desk	 I	 am	 less
dependent	on	you	than	when	I	am	with	you.	What	I	am	saying	here	is
by	no	means	more	candid,	by	no	means	more	truthful,	but	is	at	least
as	 valid	 as	 the	 things	 I	 say	when	 in	 that	 dependent	 frame	 of	mind.
Both	 are	 true,	 as	 true	 as	 I	 can	 be.	 If	 you	 are	 anxious—and	 you	 are
bound	 to	 be	 anxious—to	 know	 what	 I	 think	 of	 you	 when	 in	 my
independent	frame	of	mind,	then,	as	far	as	I	remember,	you	can	best
obtain	 this	 knowledge	 from	 the	 letter	 I	wrote	 immediately	 after	my
penultimate	visit	to	Berlin.39	Perhaps	you	have	got	it,	and	can	find	it.
I	won’t	repeat	what	I	said	then,	nor	could	I	do	so.	Anyway,	what	was
said	 then	 constitutes	 the	 ultimate	 basis	 for	 our	 relationship,
repudiated	by	neither	side.
I	 know	 this	 basis	 is	 not	 altogether	 firm,	 at	 least	 not	 expressly



acknowledged	 by	 you,	 and	 this	 is	 what	 worries	 me.	 We	 may	 be
holding	 each	 other	 firmly	 by	 the	 hand	 at	 present,	 but	 the	 ground
under	our	feet	is	not	firm;	it	keeps	shifting	endlessly	and	chaotically.
At	times	I	don’t	know	whether	our	firm	holding	of	hands	is	enough	to
keep	the	balance.	In	any	case,	I	won’t	be	the	one	to	falter.

F.

May	24,	1914
My	 dearest	 Felice,	 I	 am	 keeping	 the	 promise	 I	made	myself,	 and	 in
spite	of	your	last	letter	am	sending	you	the	enclosed	letter.	Moreover,
it	 is	 right	 to	 do	 so;	 for	 although	 the	 letter	 was	 the	 result	 of	 an
immediate	cause,	it	is	by	no	means	cancelled	by	its	disappearance,	the
more	so	since	the	cause	itself	has	not	entirely	disappeared.	Besides,	it
contains	not	a	word	I	need	feel	ashamed	of,	not	a	sentence	which	in
the	main	expresses	anything	but	concern	for	you.
The	plan	with	regard	to	my	sister	has	turned	out	badly.	Fully	aware

of	 the	 difficulties	 of	 its	 execution,	 I	 approached	 you	 in	 confidence.
You	thought	it	would	be	difficult,	yet	feasible,	and	evidently	discussed
it	with	your	mother;	you	acted	correctly.	Likewise	I	acted	correctly	by
not	reading	undivided	agreement	into	your	last	letter,	and	expecting	a
more	 definite	 reply	 one	 way	 or	 another	 (in	 accordance,	 moreover,
with	your	unfulfilled	promise	to	write	again).	 In	any	case	I	wouldn’t
have	 sent	my	 sister	 on	 the	 strength	 of	 your	 last	 letter.	 That	was	 all
perfectly	correct.	Then,	however,	your	mother	writes	to	my	mother	(a
most	cordial	 letter,	by	 the	way,	and	to	me	a	painful	 reminder	 that	 I
still	 haven’t	 written)	 and	 declares—I	 cannot	 remember	 the	 exact
wording—that	 she	 too	would	 have	 liked	Ottla	 to	 have	 come	 sooner
but	had	not	ventured	to	ask	her,	etc.	So	this	little	affair—which,	if	it
wasn’t	 going	 to	 succeed,	 ought	 to	 have	 been	 no	 one’s	 concern	 but
mine	and	yours—has	now	turned	into	a	family	affair.	This	is	not	right.
I	 alone	 asked,	 I	 alone	 could	 be	 refused.	 Surely	 this	 is	 perfectly
obvious.
Now,	 and	 not	 entirely	 without	 my	 approval,	 Ottla	 is	 defiant	 and

doesn’t	want	 to	 go	 at	 all.	 I	 don’t	 think	 that’s	 a	 bad	 thing;	 if	 on	 the
occasion	 of	 my	 engagement	 she	 cannot	 enjoy	 a	 prolonged	 stay	 in
Berlin,	 she	 should	 at	 least	 enjoy	 her	 defiance.	 Needless	 to	 say,	 her
defiance	 is	 directed	 in	 no	 way	 against	 you	 and	 your	 family,	 but
mainly	against	her	 father.	But	 this	 leads	us	 into	the	gloom	of	 family



affairs,	where	everyone	is	at	a	loss.
Since	you	mention	 the	 theater	 and	possible	visits	 to	 the	 theater,	 I
have	examined	the	playbill.	 I	can	see	only	2	productions	 that	would
give	 me	 pleasure,	 nothing	 else.	 And	 as	 far	 as	 we	 are	 concerned,
neither	is	possible.	King	Lear	is	on	Saturday.	Although	I	shall	probably
arrive	at	7,	it	isn’t	likely	that	we	would	go	to	the	theater	on	our	first
evening.	And	Franziska40	is	no	good	because	that	is	an	opening	night;
one	certainly	wouldn’t	be	able	to	get	seats,	and	a	dinner	jacket	might
be	required,	a	demand	I	am	unable	to	fulfill.
I	am	also	enclosing	a	letter	from	my	uncle,	which	is	meant	for	you,
too.	When	I	reach	60	I	am	unlikely	to	be	in	such	a	mood—although	I
might,	 of	 course,	 be	 in	 a	 deliriously	 happy	 frame	 of	mind!	 Isn’t	 he
charming?	Send	me	a	reply	for	him	if	you	feel	like	it,	and	I	will	add	to
it.	Please	return	his	letter	as	well.
Should	someone	ask	you	what	your	fiancé	looks	like,	say	you	have
taken	a	photograph	and	show	them	the	enclosed	little	cloud.	It	really
is	me,	and	you	actually	took	the	photograph.

Franz

Enclosure:
Letter	from	Kafka’s	uncle	Alfred	Löwy
[LETTERHEAD:	Compañia	de	Explotación	de	los	Ferrocarriles	de	Madrid	á
Cáceres	y	Portugal	y	del	Oeste	de	Españia]

Madrid,	May	14,	1914
Dear	Franz	and	dear	Frl.	Felice,
Your	 affectionate,	 joint,	 undated	 letter	 (happy	 people	 don’t	 count
the	days)	came	as	a	delightful	surprise;	 it	 sounds	 like	a	 lovers’	duet,
and	will	be	preserved	not	as	a	letter,	but	as	a	piece	of	music.
I	 repeat	 my	 warmest	 congratulations	 for	 your	 present	 and	 my
heartfelt	good	wishes	for	your	future	happiness.	May	you	never	forget
that	each	of	us	is	the	maker	of	his	own	happiness.
I	would	gladly	have	complied	with	your	wish	to	be	present	at	your
forthcoming	 engagement	 in	 Berlin,	 but,	 alas,	 this	 is	 not	 feasible.	 As
the	time	of	my	vacation	approaches,	more	and	more	difficulties	arise,
and	I	now	foresee	that	I	shall	not	be	able	to	leave	before	June	6th	at
the	 earliest;	what	with	 the	 length	 of	 the	 journey	 and	 a	 few	days	 in
Paris,	which	are	absolutely	essential,	you	will	realize	that	I	cannot	be
in	Prague	before	June	15th.	Don’t	be	too	disappointed;	the	inevitable



has	to	be	accepted	gracefully.
Many	thanks,	my	dear	“new”	niece,	for	the	good	opinion	you	have
of	me;	in	this	respect	you	are	far	more	indulgent	than	our	Franz,	who
is	critical	of	certain	things	in	me.	Not	that	I	blame	him,	for	I	am	not
without	faults;	on	the	contrary—as	one	day	you’ll	see	for	yourself.
I	embrace	you	both	with	all	my	heart	and	remain	your	devoted	old,
and	new,	uncle

Alfred

To	Grete	Bloch
May	24,	1914

Dear	Fräulein	Grete,	this	morning	your	letter	was	delivered	to	my	bed
(an	old	and	now	pointless	habit	of	staying	in	bed	late,	dating	back	to
the	days	of	my	prodigious	addiction	 to	 sleep!),	 then	 I	 spent	another
very	pleasant	hour	there,	mentally	composing	a	reply.	This	one,	in	the
heat	of	the	afternoon	(later	I	am	definitely	going	swimming),	certainly
won’t	 be	 either	 as	 full	 or	 as	 precise,	 especially	 so	 far	 as	 F.	 is
concerned.
One	has	some	convictions	that	are	so	deep-seated	and	true	that	one
doesn’t	 have	 to	 worry	 about	 a	 detailed	 justification.	 One’s	 mind,
moreover,	 is	so	full	of	them	that	there’s	no	room	for	arguments;	one
wouldn’t	 know	 where	 to	 put	 them.	 One	 delivers	 them	 only	 on
demand,	but	of	course,	 in	elemental	 force,	 they	cannot	be	compared
to	 the	 ineffable	 justification.	 I	 don’t	 have	 many	 convictions	 of	 this
kind	(which	an	outsider,	needless	to	say,	could	easily	call	prejudices);
two	 of	 them,	 my	 conviction	 of	 the	 abomination	 of	 contemporary
medicine,	and	my	conviction	of	the	ugliness	of	the	fur	stole	(you	call
it	 a	 shawl?),	 remain	 to	 be	 discussed.	 As	 far	 as	 you	 are	 concerned,
however,	there	is	a	difference	between	these	two	convictions.	Valerian
tea	I	dislike	even	if	you	drink	it,	but	I	have	not	the	slightest	objection
to	a	fur	stole	if	you	wear	it.	I	am	being	perfectly	serious.	(I	don’t	even
dread	the	garment	you	say	is	so	awful,	I	am	merely	curious.	Whatever
can	it	be?	A	train	5	yards	long?	A	dirndl?)
You	are	quite	right,	insomnia	is	also	somewhat	degrading.	If	I	could
show	 someone	 the	present	 state	of	my	head,	 a	 legacy	 from	 the	past
night,	he	would	wring	his	hands.	But	I	do	know	the	main	reasons	for
my	insomnia,	largely	30	years	of	a	pretty	unhealthy	way	of	life.	One
could	still	do	a	great	deal	about	it	and	much	that	would	be	effective,



for	instance	go	to	bed	early	and	at	regular	hours,	but	this	I	don’t	do.
It’s	my	fault	and	I	have	to	put	up	with	it.	We	both	hate	fake	fur,	why
don’t	we	both	hate	fake	sleep?	The	second	principle	of	natural	therapy
is:	 Avoid	 administering	 any	medicament	 to	 an	 organism	 unless	 you
know	 its	 full	 effects,	 which	 are	 bound	 to	 spread	 throughout	 this
organism.	 That’s	why	 there	 can	 be	 no	 legitimate	 specialization,	 and
every	 specialist	 who	 deals	 with	 internal	 complaints	 is	 a	 gentleman
who	deserves	to	be	shot.	Organisms	can’t	be	divided	without	being	in
some	way	destroyed.	If	I	have	a	lump	of	coal	too	large	to	go	through
the	stove	door,	the	most	practical	thing	is	to	smash	it.	But	if	I	am	to
go	through	a	door	that	is	too	narrow	for	me,	it	wouldn’t	be	the	most
practical	thing	to	cut	myself	in	half	for	the	purpose.	Supposing	I	were
made	 entirely	 of	 sleep	 that	 had	 gradually	 turned	 to	 nonsleep,	 I
wouldn’t	 hesitate	 to	 give	 this	 nonsleep	 some	 valerian	 tea;	 indeed,	 I
would	even	fill	 it	up	with	bromide	or	Veronal	 in	order	to	gain	sleep
from	nonsleep.	But	 since	 I	am	not	 sleep	but	a	human	being	as	well,
this	process	would	be	wrong.
[Presumably	the	continuation	of	this	letter]
But	today	I	won’t	be	able	to	say	all	I	have	to	say	on	this	subject.
I	 know	 of	 absolutely	 nothing	 about	 my	 relationship	 with	 F.	 that
you,	dear	Fräulein	Grete,	are	not	as	much	entitled	to	know	as	F.,	and
even	should	know,	I	feel.	The	way	you	formulate	the	question:	“Before
the	engagement	I	knew	at	all	times	…,	followed	by	a	sentence	(?)	for
a	 possible	 Yes,”	 I	 don’t	 quite	 understand.	 But	 if	 what	 it	means	 is	 a
question	of	what	has	changed	in	my	relationship	with	F.	compared	to
the	days	before	the	engagement,	then	I	must	give	you	the	somewhat
strange	 reply:	Nothing	has	changed.	Outwardly	of	 course	 there	have
been	 changes,	 inwardly	 none,	 at	 least	 none	 that	 I	 know	 of	 or	 that
might	 have	 been	 implied.	 You	 ask	 what	 F.	 says	 in	 her	 letters.	 She
writes	fairly	regularly.	But	she	is	very	busy	at	the	office	and	the	letters
are	 confined	 to	 discussions	 about	 the	 apartment	 and	 that	 kind	 of
thing.	 There	 have	 been	 only	 two	 really	 encouraging	 items:	 that	 she
has	 finally	given	notice	 to	 the	 lady	doctor	and	 instead	 is	 learning	to
swim.	 They	 have	 had	 some	 fairly	 good	 news	 from	 her	 brother,	 it
seems	he	has	got	a	job	he	can	live	on.	As	far	as	I	can	see,	F.	must	have
done	 a	 tremendous	 lot	 for	 him.—I	 haven’t	 heard	 much	 more	 than
that.
On	the	other	hand	I	still	have	a	great	deal	 to	say	 in	reply	to	your
letter,	but	am	postponing	it	because	it’s	late	and	my	pen	is	refusing	to
function.	 A	word	 about	 the	 address	 because	 your	 inquiry	 sounds	 so



urgent.*	I	took	the	manuscript	to	our	shop	in	order	to	get	it	wrapped.	I
meant	to	write	the	address	myself.	But	my	youngest	sister,	Ottla	(she
works	at	the	shop	almost	all	day),	because	she	is	childish	(she	is	20,
but	a	dear	and	good	child),	insisted	on	writing	the	address	herself.	So
she	wrote	it	to	my	dictation,	but	under	a	constant	hail	of	abuse	on	my
part	 because	 I	 considered	 her	 handwriting	 too	 small	 and	 illegible.	 I
was	 particularly	 annoyed	 by	 her	 W	 in	 Wien	 [Vienna].	 The	 parcel,
however,	arrived.

Kindest	regards,	yours,	Franz	K.

What	 news	 will	 I	 get	 tomorrow?	 And	 why	 should	 Berlin	 make
you	silent?
In	case	you	wish	to	write	to	Dr.	Weiss,	his	address	is	no	longer
the	 one	 that’s	 on	 the	 manuscript;	 it	 is	 Charlottenburg,
Grolmannstrasse	61.

Imagine,	I	still	haven’t	written	to	Budapest,	I	 just	can’t	make	up
my	mind.	 I	 am	 so	 lazy	 about	writing,	 particularly	 to	 strangers.
And	undoubtedly	it’s	very	wrong	of	me.	It	is	strange	that	both	F.’s
attempt,	and	yours,	to	bring	her	sister	and	me	closer	together	has
made	 me	 a	 little	 reluctant	 to	 write.	 But	 only	 a	 little,	 for	 my
reluctance	 to	 write	 this	 letter	 is	 looking	 everywhere	 for	 an
explanation.	About	a	year	ago,	 in	answer	 to	my	request,	F.	 sent
me	one	of	her	sister’s	letters;41	the	8	pages	contained	nothing	but
household	 accounts,	 and	 of	 the	most	 trivial	 kind.	 It	was	 almost
funny.	And	the	passage	you	quoted	from	her	letter	the	other	day
was	pretty	fatuous.	And	yet	somehow	I	do	like	this	sister,	but	for
the	moment	I	cannot	write	to	her.

May	25,	1914
At	 this	 moment	my	 heart	 is	 beating	 with	 the	 fury	 of	 a	 schoolboy’s
after	reading	tales	of	Red	Indians.	I	have	been	reading	a	few	pages	of
Berlioz’s	memoirs.	But	this	is	not	what	I	want	to	talk	about.
Really,	Felice?	Time	is	passing	too	swiftly	for	you?	Already	the	end

of	May?	 Already?	Well,	 here	 I	 am,	 holding	 the	 key;	 if	 you	 like,	 I’ll
wind	back	the	time.	To	which	month	during	the	past	two	years	shall	I
wind	it	back?	Tell	me	exactly!
You	put	me	to	shame,	F.;	 judging	by	my	handwriting,	you	say	my



finger	 appears	 to	 be	 better.	 Better?	My	 finger	 has	 been	 all	 right	 for
ages,	and	the	handwriting	in	my	last	letter	was	almost	my	best.
You	 also	 sadden	 me.	 You’re	 not	 very	 ingenious.	 What	 piece	 of
furniture	 will	 be	 needed?	 A	 folding	 screen,	 of	 course,	 or	 a	 mat,	 in
order	 to	 do	 Müller	 exercises.	 In	 order	 to	 do	 them	 naked,	 with	 the
window	open,	and	so	prevent	the	people	opposite	from	joining	in	the
exercises.
I	 had	 seen	 the	 playbill.	 Yesterday’s	 letter	 showed	 there	 was	 no
possibility	of	my	going	to	the	theater.	On	the	other	hand,	my	mother
and	Ottla	might	well	go.	And	if	possible	before	Saturday,	prior	to	my
father’s	arrival,	because	the	theater	is	not	a	thing	he	enjoys.	It	would
be	 an	 effort	 for	 him	 to	 go.	 So	 it	 would	 be	 better	 to	 take	 him	 to
something	 else,	 to	 the	 cinematograph	 you	 once	 mentioned,	 or
anything	for	which	one	can	get	seats	at	the	last	minute.	The	best	thing
for	my	mother	and	Ottla	would	probably	be	As	You	Like	It	on	Friday.
Otherwise,	don’t	get	any	tickets	for	them,	please,	on	no	account.
Yes,	Ottla	has	come	to	the	end	of	her	defiance	and	is	delighted	to
come	along.	Family	affairs	once	more,	and	gloom.
Where	 will	 they	 stay?	 I	 assume	 there	 are	 no	 hotels	 in	 your
neighborhood,	 and	 if	 there	 are,	 they	 are	 bound	 to	 be	 unnecessarily
expensive.	 So	 wouldn’t	 the	 Askanische	 Hof	 be	 the	 place	 to	 go?	My
joys	 and	 miseries	 are	 so	 entwined	 with	 the	 place;	 it	 is	 almost	 as
though	I	had	left	behind	some	roots	onto	which	I	could	graft	myself
on	my	 return.	 Besides,	 they	 like	me	 there.	 On	 the	 other	 hand,	 it	 is
rather	uncomfortable,	 also	 fairly	 expensive;	 but—I	 stick	 to	 it—I	 still
like	it	best.
In	every	letter	all	you	need	say	to	satisfy	me	is	that	preparations	for
the	 wedding	 are	 going	 ahead—although	 I	 admit	 I	 don’t	 quite
understand	 the	magnitude	 of	 the	 work	 involved.	 By	 the	 way,	 don’t
forget!	 the	 thing	 that	plays	a	 far	greater	part	 in	your	 trousseau	 than
either	 furniture	 or	 linen	 is	 swimming.	 You	 promised	 to	 report	 any
progress	 you	 made.	 Since	 you	 haven’t	 reported	 anything,	 am	 I	 to
assume	 that	 you	 have	 made	 no	 progress	 since	 you	 enrolled?	 I	 can
hardly	believe	it.	Besides,	you	will	have	to	take	a	test	at	Whitsun.	Are
you	being	taught	on	a	pole	or	with	a	machine?
You	shall	have	the	plan	of	the	apartment.	The	fact	that	Adler42	lives
in	the	same	house	doesn’t	worry	me	provided	the	Lindström	machines
haven’t	been	perfected	to	such	a	degree	that	they	can	be	heard	all	the
way	 from	 the	 mezzanine	 to	 the	 4th	 floor.	 Unless,	 of	 course,	 the
tenants	on	every	floor	were	to	buy	his	machines.	In	that	case,	I	really



don’t	know	what	you	and	I	would	do	on	top	of	that	vast	sounding	box.
Franz

To	Felice	Bauer’s	mother
May	25,	1914

Dear	Mother,
So	you	have	had	an	accident,	and	a	rather	serious	one.	You	see,	you
should	have	done	as	I	wished	and	stayed	on	in	Prague	where	there	is
no	 Elevated	 and	 where,	 if	 there	 were	 such	 a	 thing,	 I	 would	 surely
have	pulled	your	finger	clear	of	the	door	in	time.	But	now	we	shall	all
arrive	 in	grand	procession	 in	order	 to	 inspect	 the	 finger,	and	 if,	as	 I
hope,	 it	 is	 not	 too	 sore,	 we	 will	 try	 to	 heal	 it	 completely	 with	 an
affectionate	kiss.
With	kindest	regards	to	you	all,

yours,	Franz

Brief	lesson	in	Czech:
[LETTERHEAD:	Úrazová	pojištovna	dělnická	pro	Královsti	Ćeské	v	Praze43]

May	28,	1914
At	 the	office.	There	 is	a	 lot	 to	do.	 I	wasn’t	 cross.	 I	was	 furious,	 sad,
and	a	number	of	 other	 things,	 but	not	 cross.	 (If	 I	 didn’t	 suffer	 from
insomnia	 anyway,	 it	 might	 have	 contributed	 to	 it.)	 For	 the	 sake	 of
accuracy	I	must	add	that	your	not	writing	lasted	not	two	but	3	days.
Always	the	same	old	story,	the	same	all	through	history:	Each	of	us
chooses	 his	 own	 battleground.	 I	 shall	 have	 no	 alternative	 but	 to
capture	the	other	one	as	well.	A	worthy	necessity	in	a	worthy	cause.
Within	the	next	few	days	you	can	expect	to	be	approached	from	2
sides,	 apparently	 at	my	 instigation,	 about	 the	 purchase	 of	 furniture.
Once	by	the	Deutsche	Werkstätten.44	They	keep	writing	to	me,	finally
I	 had	 to	 answer.	Actually,	 I	 really	 do	 consider	 their	 furniture	 is	 the
best,	 I	 mean	 the	 most	 suitable,	 the	 simplest.	 Secondly,	 a
representative	of	a	Prague	firm	will	call	on	you.	See	that	he	is	thrown
out	 at	 once.	 He	 came	 to	 see	 me	 at	 the	 office	 one	 day;	 in	 my
drowsiness	I	muttered	something,	whereupon	he	handed	me	his	card,
assured	me	 that	as	an	ex-Berliner	 it	would	be	exceptionally	easy	 for
him	to	gratify	your	tastes,	and	left.	Then,	not	long	ago,	back	he	came.
He	was	 rather	better	dressed,	 and	my	unfortunate	memory	 for	 faces



deluded	me	into	mistaking	him	for	a	well-known	lawyer.	Approaching
him	 in	 the	 friendliest	 fashion,	 I	 shook	 him	 by	 the	 hand	 and—
discovered	 who	 he	 was.	 (I	 want	 you	 to	 know	 that	 the	 firm	 he
represents	 sells	 extremely	 expensive,	 highly	 ornate	 furniture.)
Incapable	of	suddenly	turning	myself	into	an	unfriendly	customer,	and
since	 he	 asked	 for	 it	 in	 connection	 with	 a	 trip	 to	 Berlin	 (he	 will
probably	 call	 on	 you	 on	 Friday),	 I	 gave	 him	 your	 address.	 What’s
more,	he	asked	me	to	announce	his	visit	to	you	by	letter.	Even	this,	to
a	man	whose	hand	I	had	shaken	in	so	friendly	a	fashion,	I	could	not
refuse,	and	am	now	carrying	it	out	in	this	caddish	manner.
Greetings	 to	 all,	 yours	 and	 mine,45	 and	 allow	 me	 to	 kiss	 that
singularly	sweet	face	of	yours.

F.

To	Grete	Bloch
May	29,	1914

Dear	Fräulein	Grete,	when	you	read	this	both	of	us,	I	hope	both	of	us,
will	be	in	Berlin.	It	is	very	kind	of	you	to	come,	very	kind.	Since	I	may
not	 be	 capable	 of	 expressing	 this	 in	words	 (your	 reservations	 about
your	dress	are	the	same	as	mine	about	my	silence,	which	is	both	my
burden	and	my	blessing),	I	hasten	to	put	it	on	paper.
Your	last	letter	but	one	arrived	on	Wednesday;	it	was	not	until	I	had
read	 it	 several	 times	 that	 I	 realized,	 or	 thought	 I	 realized,	 that	 you
must	 have	 supposed	 that	 this	 letter	 would	 arrive	 on	 Tuesday,	 that
consequently	my	reply	should	have	reached	you	by	Wednesday.	No,	it
didn’t	get	here	till	Wednesday	morning,	and	soon	after,	in	the	office,	I
got	the	other	letter.	If	you	had	come	to	Prague	I	should	certainly	have
gone	 at	 noon	 on	 Saturday	 and	 arrived	 in	 Berlin	 at	 6:51.	 Now,
however,	 I	 am	 doubtful	 and	 probably	won’t	 leave	 till	 3,	 arriving	 at
10:30	P.M.	My	 luggage	will	 consist	of	 insomnia,	 a	queasy	 stomach,	 a
twitching	 head,	 and	 pains	 in	 the	 left	 leg,	 but	 it	 won’t	 weigh	much
compared	to	the	pleasure	of	the	reunion.
Just	 hurry,	 and	 get	 to	 F.,†	 regardless	 of	 your	 dress,	 don’t	 try	 to
improve	 it;	no	matter	what	 it’s	 like,	 it	will	be	viewed	with	 the,	yes,
with	the	most	affectionate	eyes.

Yours,	Franz	K.



To	Grete	Bloch
May	2	[presumably	June	2	or	3],	1914

Dear	 Fräulein	Grete,	 only	 a	 few	 lines;	 this	 afternoon	 I	 had	 to	 try	 to
make	up	 for	 last	night’s	 lack	of	 sleep,	 this	 evening	 take	my	parents’
place	 in	 the	 shop—so	 there	 isn’t	much	 time,	 but	 enough	 to	 say	 the
following:	you	cannot	be	fully	aware	of	what	you	mean	to	me,	yet	the
little	of	which	you	are	aware	must	make	you	realize	that	in	a	situation
which	 you	 don’t	 by	 any	 means	 wholly	 recognize	 but	 which
emotionally	you	are	able	to	share	with	me	to	the	full,	you	probably	do
just	about	everything	one	human	being	can	do	for	another;	and	that
this	 everything	 is	 always	 concentrated	 in	 everything	 you	 do,
especially	 in	 your	 gaze,	 and	 has	 its	 effect;	 yes,	 its	 effect,	 Fräulein
Grete,	it	has	its	effect.	And	now	I	merely	kiss	your	dear	hand.

Franz	K.

To	Grete	Bloch
[LETTERHEAD:	Workers’	Accident	Insurance	Institute]

June	4,	1914
Dear	 Fräulein	 Grete,	 traveled	 well,	 slept	 badly,	 back	 in	 the	 office
impersonated	an	official’s	 ghost	 after	 the	 cock	had	 crowed	 thrice.	 It
can	be	grasped	in	retrospect	because	one	lived	through	it,	but	at	the
time	not	a	moment	seemed	safe	until	the	experience	was	over.	I	could
think	of	little	but	that	I	wished	to	be	felled	by	some	nervous	fever	or
something,	 to	which	 I	would	 succumb	 in	 sight	 of	 everyone,	 thereby
gaining	 the	 right	 to	 let	myself	 be	 carried	home.	 Instead	 I	dictated	a
long	 report	 about	 the	 expert	 opinion	 on	 the	 5th	 Classification	 of
Danger,	and	my	typist,	a	pink,	firm,	young	female,	kept	complaining
timidly	 of	 feeling	 sleepy	 because	 she	 hadn’t	 got	 to	 bed	 until	 (not
until!)	1	o’clock	in	the	morning.
Things	 are	 a	 little	 better	 today,	 I	 got	 some	 sleep.	 The	 worst	 or
almost	the	worst	thing	is	that	I	have	so	little	time.	Haven’t	I	told	you
that	 before	 the	 holidays	 I	 started	 to	write?	 (To	which,	 by	 the	way,
your	 comment	 was	 remarkably	 wrong:	 that	 this	 wasn’t	 the	 most
important	 thing.)	 Now,	 after	 yesterday	morning	 and	 this	 last	 rather
better	 night,	 I	 promised	 myself	 I’d	 go	 to	 bed	 at	 10:30—which
practically	 puts	 an	 end	 to	writing.	And	 then	 there’s	 the	 hour	 at	 the
shop	 in	 the	 evening.	 No	 sooner	 has	 night	 fallen	 than	 the	 hour	 to
proceed	with	the	dictation	of	the	report	is	here	again.	But	you	may	be



right;	it	is	not	the	most	important	thing	for	me	to	write	in	Prague,	the
most	important	thing	is	for	me	to	get	out	of	Prague.
I	have	now	read	“The	Legend.”46	(What	pleasure	one	derives	from
the	immediate	fulfillment	of	a	promise!	Pleasure	far	beyond	the	actual
fulfillment.)	I	like	your	brother	better	than	this	play.	There	are	some
good	 passages,	 certainly,	 also	 some	 surprising	 passages,	 but	 despite
the	quality	of	these	passages	and	their	capacity	to	surprise,	I	don’t	feel
able	 to	 say	anything	positive	 about	 it.	After	 all,	 it’s	 no	more	 than	a
childish	 piece	 of	 work,	 gathered	 together	 from	 here	 and	 there	 and
making	 a	 rather	 flimsy	 whole.	 Odd	 that	 he	 should	 accuse	 you	 of
effusiveness	when	he	is	capable	of	such	effusiveness	with	mere	words
(“life	 in	me	 began	 to	 rebel	 and	 let	 out	 a	 piercing	 cry	 like	 that	 of	 a
mortally	 wounded	 beast,”	 etc.—no,	 that’s	 no	 good,	 or	 rather	 it’s
childish	and	might	mean	anything).	Undoubtedly	he	will	write	better
things,	 or	 has	 already.	 Indeed,	 he	 is	 sure	 to	 do	 so,	 for	 he	 gives	 the
impression	 of	 being	 a	 very	 observant,	 right-thinking,	 confident,
tenacious	person,	if	a	trifle	too	caustic.	In	fact,	for	someone	wishing	to
be	useful,	 these	are	the	most	essential	qualities,	as	I	am	well	able	to
judge,	 for	 I	 have	none	of	 them.	Which	 reminds	me,	he	 really	might
have	 been	 more	 friendly	 in	 the	 way	 he	 talked	 to	 you	 at	 table,
especially	 considering	 the	 look	 you	 gave	 him.	 But	 perhaps	 he	 was
being	friendly,	and	I	am	just	oversensitive	where	you	are	concerned.

Franz	K.

We	are	sure	to	have	an	opportunity	to	talk	about	Berlin.

[ABOVE	THE	LETTERHEAD]	I	am	enclosing	a	little	card	I	found	in	the	book.

To	Grete	Bloch
June	6,	1914
Dear	Fräulein	Grete,	yesterday	was	another	of	those	days	when	I	felt
completely	tied	down,	incapable	of	moving,	incapable	of	writing	you
the	 letter	 that	everything	still	alive	within	me	urged	me	to	write.	At
times—and	 for	 the	moment	 you	 are	 the	 only	 one	 to	 know—I	 really
don’t	 know	 how	 I,	 being	 what	 I	 am,	 can	 bear	 the	 responsibility	 of
marriage.	A	marriage	erected	on	the	woman’s	fortitude?	Bound	to	be
a	crooked	edifice,	don’t	you	think?	It	will	collapse	and	in	so	doing	rip



the	foundations	from	the	earth.
Oh	God,	I	did	understand	what	you	meant,	Fräulein	Grete,	by	your

evaluation	of	my	writing.	But	even	if	understood,	your	opinion	is	not
correct,	 even	 though	 it	 is	 being	 considered.	 Each	 of	 us	 has	 his	 own
way	of	emerging	from	the	underworld,	mine	is	by	writing.	That’s	why
the	only	way	I	can	keep	going,	if	at	all,	is	by	writing,	not	through	rest
and	 sleep.	 I	 am	 far	 more	 likely	 to	 achieve	 peace	 of	 mind	 through
writing	than	the	capacity	to	write	through	peace.
But	 I	keep	talking	about	myself,	which	 in	 itself	 is	an	 indication	of

the	state	I	am	in.	I	think	this	is	what	I	did	in	Berlin	as	well,	although	I
surely	ought	 to	have	known	 that	 I	am	visible	and	alive	only	when	 I
suppress	as	much	as	possible	all	things	concerning	myself.
I	 am	 glad,	 despite	 your	 assertion	 to	 the	 contrary,	 and	 not	 only

because	 it	 confirms	my	 prediction,	 that	 you	 do	 feel	 better	 in	 Berlin
than	you	did	in	Vienna.	You	feel	better.	You	have	a	better	job,	prefer
your	work	(there	is	no	longer	a	“pigsty”),	have	your	family	with	you,
are	 not	 assailed	 by	 tormenting	 thoughts	 that	 arise	 from	 being	 far
away;	Berlin	helps	 to	 sustain	 you	as	 it	 does	 everyone	 else.	What	do
you	mean	by	your	mother	being	“too	attentive”?
I	didn’t	mean	to	include	you	in	what	I	said	about	your	brother.	Had

I	meant	to,	 I	should	have	to	have	added	a	number	of	things	which	I
can’t	put	 into	words	and	which,	 if	 I	 found	the	words,	 I	wouldn’t	put
on	 paper.	 But	 you	may	 be	 right,	 and	 you	may	have	 a	 great	 deal	 in
common	which,	 as	 far	 as	 your	 brother	 is	 concerned,	 I	 of	 course	 am
unable	 to	 see.	 In	 this	 sense	 perhaps	 “The	 Legend”	 contains
possibilities	 that	 escape	 me.	 What	 little	 there	 is	 about	 the	 Jewish
villagers,	 for	 example,	 gives	 an	 impression	 of	 truth,	 but	 it	 is	 a
universal	Zionist	yearning,	and	in	this	first	slight	attempt	within	reach
of	all	who	have	 joined	the	ranks.	Nevertheless,	 I	do	appreciate	what
there	is.	But	I	can’t	get	over	the	dryness	of	the	entire	allegory,	which
is	nothing	but	an	allegory,	which	says	all	there	is	to	say	without	ever
delving	deeper	or	drawing	one	deeper	into	it.	But	you	mentioned	your
brother’s	 short	 stories.	 Undoubtedly	 these	 would	 be	 more
characteristic,	 for	 in	 “The	 Legend”	 he	 is	 limited	 by	 the	 allegory;
elsewhere	he	is	bound	to	be	more	free,	more	open,	and	can	be	judged
with	greater	certainty.	After	all,	a	piece	of	work	like	“The	Legend”	can
succeed	only	toward	the	end	of	one’s	life	when	all	one’s	faculties	have
developed	and	are	at	one’s	disposal,	and	one	can	venture	consciously
to	 force	 them	 to	 extend	 over	 the	 entire	 span	 of	 one’s	work	without
feeling	deserted	by	most	of	them	after	the	first	few	steps.	Which	is	just



what	happened	to	your	brother,	although	his	determination	prevented
him	from	being	discouraged	by	it.

Kindest	regards,	an	affectionate	handshake.	Franz	K.

To	Grete	Bloch
June	8,	1914

Dear	 Fräulein	 Grete,	 was	 my	 letter	 really	 so	 heartrending?	 Well,
things	 are	 not	 quite	 as	 bad,	 at	 least	 not	 permanently	 as	 bad.
Everything	piles	up	when	one	sits	down	to	write,	and	nothing	wants
to	be	left	out	because	the	letter	is	addressed	to	you,	and	you	will	give
the	 right	 and	 kind	 answer	 to	 everything.	 Then	 I	 am	 left	 with	 the
consolation	that	I	have	not	really	told	you	everything,	and	so	have	the
right	to	drink	in	the	comfort	that	your	letters	bring.
In	July	I	shall	move	somewhere	into	the	woods	and	try	to	improve
myself	as	best	I	can	in	the	short	time.	Parents	here	are	in	the	habit	of
saying	 that	 it’s	 the	 children	 who	 make	 one	 realize	 how	 old	 one	 is
getting.	If	one	has	no	children,	it’s	one’s	ghosts	that	make	one	realize
it,	 and	 they	 do	 it	 all	 the	more	 thoroughly.	 I	 know	 that	when	 I	was
young	I	tried	to	lure	them	out,	they	barely	showed	themselves;	I	tried
harder,	I	was	bored	without	them,	they	wouldn’t	come,	and	I	began	to
think	they	would	never	come.	For	this	reason	I	was	often	on	the	point
of	 cursing	 my	 life.	 Later	 on	 they	 did	 appear,	 only	 now	 and	 then,
always	as	exalted	visitors,	one	had	to	bow	to	them	though	they	were
still	very	small;	quite	often	it	wasn’t	them	at	all,	 it	merely	looked	or
sounded	 as	 if	 it	 were.	 But	 when	 they	 did	 come	 they	 were	 seldom
fierce,	one	couldn’t	be	very	proud	of	 them,	at	best	 they	pounced	on
one	 like	 the	 lion	 cub	 on	 the	 bitch;	 they	 did	 bite,	 but	 this	 was
noticeable	 only	 if	 one	 placed	 one’s	 finger	 on	 the	 bitten	 spot	 and
pressed	hard	with	one’s	fingernail.	Later,	however,	they	grew	bigger,
they	 came	 and	 stayed	 at	 will,	 delicate	 birds’	 backs	 turned	 into	 the
backs	of	monumental	giants,	they	came	in	through	every	door,	forcing
those	that	were	shut;	huge,	bony	ghosts	they	were,	nameless	in	their
multitude;	a	single	ghost	could	be	fought,	but	not	all	those	by	which
one	 was	 surrounded.	 If	 one	 were	 writing,	 they	 were	 all	 benevolent
spirits;	when	not	writing,	they	were	demons,	and	pressed	so	close	that
all	 one	 could	 do	 was	 raise	 a	 hand	 to	 declare	 one’s	 presence.
Presumably	 one	 was	 not	 responsible	 for	 the	 way	 one	 strained	 the
raised	hand.——



The	 fact	 that	 things	 are	 better	 for	 you	 now	 is	 such	well-deserved
good	fortune	that	one	should	accept	it	entirely	as	a	matter	of	course.
How	you	must	have	suffered	in	recent	months,	while	I	kept	writing	of
nothing	but	myself,	and	at	first	even	deceitfully!	Of	course	I	have	no
knowledge	 of	 your	 domestic	 misfortunes,	 but	 don’t	 you	 think	 that
whatever	 tormented	 you,	 and	 still	 torments	 you	 in	 this	 respect,
produced	 the	positive	 reactions	which	 stand	you	 in	 such	good	 stead
now	 that	 you	 are	 facing	 the	 world?	 Incidentally,	 I	 don’t	 know
[Strindberg’s]	Dance	of	Death,	and	don’t	know	what	you	are	implying;
doesn’t	it	take	place	in	a	lighthouse?
I	meant	 to	 tell	you	not	 to	exert	yourself	by	writing	 to	me,	and	 to
leave	your	office	earlier.	A	few	lines	are	enough	for	me,	though	I	do
need	 those.	 Two	 sentences	 and	 your	 signature	 are	 enough.	 And
forgive	me	 if	 I	 complain	 too	much.	After	all,	 everything	 is	bearable,
and	 if	 the	 pain	 remains,	 the	 days	 do	 change,	 the	 expression	 of	 the
pain	 changes,	 one’s	 powers	 of	 resistance	 change,	 and	 then	 one	 is
carried	along	more	or	less	alive	on	the	waves	of	change.

Franz	K.

[IN	THE	MARGIN]	I	didn’t	get	a	postcard	written	on	Sunday.

To	Grete	Bloch
June	11,	1914

Dear	Fräulein	Grete,	a	strange,	a	thoroughly	strange	letter.
You	say	you	don’t	believe	 that	 things	have	 improved,	but	without
being	“able	to	give	the	reasons,”	thereby	increasing—unintentionally,
of	 course—my	 anxiety.	 As	 a	 matter	 of	 fact,	 given	 my	 nature,	 this
would	be	the	best	way	of	dispelling	my	fears,	provided	there	were	no
visible	yet	inscrutable	reasons	for	extreme	disquiet.
But	then,	in	contradiction	to	your	first	sentence,	you	say	you	don’t
believe	in	the	inevitability	of	my	predicament.	Now	please	disregard
the	 recognizable	characteristics	 that	distinguish	me	as	an	 individual,
and	take	the	whole	as	a	typical	case.	Owing	to	circumstances	as	well
as	 to	 his	 own	 temperament,	 a	 completely	 antisocial	 man	 in	 an
indifferent	state	of	health	hard	to	determine	at	the	moment,	excluded
from	 every	 great	 soul-sustaining	 community	 on	 account	 of	 his	 non-
Zionist	 (I	 admire	 Zionism	 and	 am	 nauseated	 by	 it),	 nonpracticing



Judaism;	 the	most	 precious	 part	 of	 his	 nature	 continually	 and	most
agonizingly	upset	 by	 the	 enforced	 labor	of	his	 office—a	man	of	 this
kind,	 certainly	 under	 the	 deepest	 inner	 compulsion,	 decides	 to	 get
married—to	undertake,	in	other	words,	the	most	social	of	acts.	For	a
man	of	this	kind,	that	strikes	me	as	no	mean	venture.
And	finally	your	letter	included	this	insult	which,	as	such,	happened
to	give	me	great	pleasure:	“surely	you’ll	be	able	to	survive	another	3
months.”	 But	 Fräulein	 Grete,	 if	 one	 says	 that	 3	months	 is	 too	 long,
thereby	one	says	equally	that	it	is	too	short.	And	that’s	what	it	is.
The	other	day	you	asked	after	Ottla.	She	 is	well,	despite	 spending
the	 whole	 day	 at	 the	 shop.	 For	 her	 mind	 is	 not	 on	 the	 shop,	 but
entirely	 on	 the	 Institute	 for	 the	 Blind	 where	 for	 some	 weeks	 now,
particularly	 during	 the	 past	 fortnight,	 she	 has	 made	 a	 number	 of
friends,	 one	 especially	 good	 friend—a	 young	 basket-weaver	 whose
one	eye	is	closed	and	the	other	enormously	swollen.	He	is	her	special
friend,	is	gentle,	understanding,	and	faithful.	She	goes	to	see	him	on
Sundays	 and	 holidays	 and	 reads	 to	 him,	 amusing	 things	 whenever
possible.	No	doubt	 a	 somewhat	dangerous	 and	painful	 pleasure.	 For
what	is	normally	expressed	by	the	eyes,	the	blind	use	their	fingertips.
They	finger	her	dress,	 take	hold	of	her	sleeve,	stroke	her	hands,	and
this	 big	 strong	 girl—whom	 I	 have	unfortunately,	 if	 not	 deliberately,
led	slightly	astray—calls	this	her	greatest	joy.	She	says	she	wakes	up
happy	 and	 cannot	 think	 why—until	 suddenly	 she	 remembers	 the
blind.	 Spends	 the	 whole	 week	 collecting	 cigars	 and	 cigarettes
(economizing	on	her	food)	so	as	to	hand	them	to	the	blind	on	Sunday,
has	even	managed	to	acquire	an	old	cigar	case	which	she	is	going	to
take	them	today.	She	has	no	contact	with	the	blind	girls,	nor	for	that
matter	have	her	blind	friends	any	contact	with	the	blind	girls	who	are,
as	they	say,	too	haughty.	“Our	female	charges	are	too	haughty.”
Thanks	 to	 these	 activities,	 Ottla	 still	 hasn’t	 written	 to	 Berlin.	 She
doesn’t	 know	 how	 to	 address	 them.	 I	 agree,	 she	 can’t	 say	 “Dear
parents.”	 Nor	 can	 she	 say	 “My	 dears,”	 for	 this	 mode	 of	 address	 is
invariably	used	by	an	old,	widowed,	rather	sugary,	very	worthy,	yet
somewhat	 illiterate,	 physically	 vast	 aunt	 suffering	 from	disagreeable
pains	which	no	one	believes	 in,	and	 from	whom	the	expression	“My
dears,”	which	is	hers,	would	virtually	have	to	be	snatched.	Can’t	you
suggest	anything?

Kindest	regards,	yours,	Franz	K.



[IN	THE	MARGIN]	I	never	got	the	postcard	of	the	Schlossbrücke.	What	did	it
say?

To	Grete	Bloch
June	14,	1914

Dear	Fräulein	Grete,	 first	of	all	 I	was	neither	annoyed	nor	had	I	any
reason	to	be;	at	most	 I	could	be	annoyed	(and	needless	 to	say,	even
then	 only	with	myself)	 that	my	 last	 letter	 failed	 to	 convince	 you	 of
this.	 More	 likely	 it	 was	 my	 morbid	 irritability	 (a	 single	 really	 bad
night	 can	 produce	 this,	 for	 in	 my	 present	 state	 I	 depend	 on	 every
single	night,	every	single	chance	of	sleep.	Today	again	I	shall	have	to
be	 careful,	 for	 to	 all	 outward	 appearances	 last	 night	 was	 like	 the
criminal’s	 first	 night	 after	 the	 crime.	 Continually	 starting	 up	 and
dozing	 off	 again	 between	 short	 prayers.	 In	 between,	 however,	 there
have	been	some	better	nights),	so	probably	it	was	my	irritability	that
made	me	almost	deliberately	read	things	that	were	not	in	your	letter,
and	which,	even	if	they	had	been,	could	not	have	belied	their	origin—
your	 good,	 generous	 heart.	 But	 somehow	 it	 gave	me	pleasure	 to	 let
you	 insult	 me,	 if	 only	 in	 my	 imagination,	 and	 I	 was	 sufficiently
annoyed	to	yield	to	this	temptation.
On	 the	 whole	 you	 interpret	 my	 “confession”	 correctly,	 and
consequently	 your	 surprise	 is	 equally	 correct.	What	 you	 don’t	 quite
grasp	 is	 the	 heart	 of	 the	 “confession,”	 and	 this	 (with	 certain
limitations	 and	disregard	 for	 detail)	 is	 very	 simple,	 only	 too	 simple.
Because	among	the	points	mentioned	there	is	one	that	(Ottla	has	just
been	here	and	distracted	me	with	stories	of	her	blind	friend	to	whom
she	is	about	to	take	a	bunch	of	roses)	dominates	them	all.	Which	is,	as
you	will	 soon	 see,	my	state	of	health,	which	you	call	 “nothing.”	 If	 I
were	 healthier	 and	 stronger,	 all	 difficulties	 would	 have	 been
overcome,	I	would	have	left	the	office	long	ago,	I	would	be	quite	sure
of	F.	and	 sure	of	 the	whole	world;	whatever	might	 still	be	 lacking	 I
could	replace	with	my	health,	whereas	now	I	have	to	refer	everything
to	my	lack	of	health.	Shall	I	say	more	about	this?	This	state	of	health
is	also	deceptive,	it	deceives	even	me;	at	any	moment	I	am	liable	to	be
assailed	 by	 the	most	 detailed	 and	 precise	 imaginings	 and	 invariably
on	 the	 most	 inconvenient	 occasions.	 Undoubtedly	 an	 enormous
hypochondria,	 which	 however	 has	 struck	 so	 many	 and	 such	 deep
roots	 within	 me	 that	 I	 stand	 or	 fall	 with	 it.	 You	 consider	 my



“obstinacy”	 a	 good	 sign.	 There	 is	 some	 truth	 in	 this.	 Obstinacy,
however,	can	also	be	the	result	of	despair.
My	 state	 of	 health	 is	 on	 one	 side	 of	 the	 scales,	 everything	 else	 I
have	mentioned	is	on	the	other.	There	 is	a	moment	when	the	whole
thing	 trembles	 in	 the	 balance	 and	 waits	 for	 a	 decision.	 Either	 my
health	 has	 sufficient	 weight	 to	 raise	 the	 other	 side	 of	 the	 scales,
thereby	allowing	everything	on	 it	 to	evaporate,	or	 it	 fails	 to	hold	 its
own,	 is	 raised	 in	 its	 turn,	 and	 is	 then	heated	by	 the	 contents	 of	 the
other	side	until	a	veritable	ghost	is	hatched.
I	had	heard	of	Aunt	E[milie]’s	 illness	only	from	you.	On	the	other
hand,	I	am	well	aware	that	I	still	haven’t	written	to	Erna,	that	I	ought
to,	 and	 even	 want	 to.	 (At	 moments	 Erna	 struck	 me	 as	 almost
magnificent.)	But	in	that	case	I	should	have	to	write	to	Toni	as	well,
and	much	as	I	like	Toni,	my	hand	is	absurdly	clumsy.	As	for	Else,	I	did
finally	manage	to	get	the	better	of	myself.
I	was	sorry	that	you	stayed	awake	so	long	for	my	sake,	don’t	do	it
again.	On	the	other	hand,	I	was	pleased	to	hear	that	if	you	really	try
you	 can	 leave	 the	 office	 at	 5:30.	 How	 would	 it	 be	 if	 you	 took
swimming	lessons	with	F.?

Yours,	Franz	K.

To	Grete	Bloch
[June	16	or	17,	1914]

Dear	Fräulein	Grete,	 just	a	 few	 lines	written	 in	a	 lovely	park,	 to	 the
splash	 of	 a	 fountain	 and	 the	 peaceful	 sound	 of	 children.	 I	 am
developing	 a	 taste	 for	 the	 amusements	 of	 very	 old	married	 couples,
for	 the	view	across	 lawns,	 for	 sitting	quietly	 in	 the	 evening	 sun,	 for
watching	 sparrows—I	 wonder	 why?	 My	 head	 which	 has	 had
practically	 no	 sleep	 for	 4	 nights—it	 had	 been	 much	 better—is
beginning	to	calm	down	a	little.	And	how	do	I	live?	You	are	sitting	in
your	 office	 rapping	 your	 pupils’	 knuckles,	 while	 I—today	 was	 an
exceptionally	easy	day—tried	in	vain	to	get	an	hour’s	sleep,	then	went
to	 the	 swimming	 baths,	 swam,	 did	 my	 exercises,	 and	 then,	 after	 a
walk,	drank	some	sour	milk	in	a	milk	bar,	and	am	now	sitting	in	the
park	writing	 to	 you.	 Could	 a	 nursemaid	 look	 after	me	with	 greater
care	than	I	do?	And	tonight?	Tonight	I	shall	sleep	as	light	as	a	feather
for	 2–3	 hours,	 start	 up	 now	 and	 again,	 then	 wake	 up	 for	 good,
perhaps	 half	 lose	 consciousness	 for	 brief	 moments,	 but	 never	 go	 to



sleep	 again,	 and	 promptly,	 each	 time	 the	 tower	 clock	 strikes,	 be
reminded	that	time	passes,	 that	after	 the	dreadful	night	 the	dreadful
day	will	dawn,	etc.	What	idiotic	complaints!	And	yet	I	know	perfectly
well	that	it	has	to	pass	and	that	I	shan’t	perish	in	the	process.
This	 evening,	 by	 the	way,	 I	 shan’t	 get	 to	 bed	 until	 very	 late.	 Dr.
Weiss,	according	to	a	letter	I	had	yesterday,	is	arriving	from	Berlin	at
11.	 I	 find	 this	a	 little	upsetting.	He	 intended	to	come	to	Prague,	but
not	until	early	July,	and	now	he	is	arriving	so	unexpectedly.	What	am
I	 to	do	 if	 he	 is	 coming	here	on	account	of	my	news.	 It	wouldn’t	 be
impossible,	but	horrid	for	me.
So	 this	 again	 was	 caused	 by	 the	 complainer	 in	 me,	 just	 as—my
conscience	was	pricking	me	all	day	yesterday,	and	began	to	prick	me
again	 today	 on	 account	 of	 your	 letter—he	 caused	 you	 alarm
yesterday.	How	does	God	put	up	with	these	complaints?	Why	doesn’t
He	 strike	 me	 down?	 But	 in	 fact—and	 this	 again	 is	 the	 complainer
talking—He	does	strike	me	down.
Yes,	 I	 shall	be	writing	 to	Erna	now,	quite	definitely;	 I	 should	also
like	 to	 give	 both	 Erna	 and	 Toni	 a	 present.	 It’s	 my	 weakness	 again
which	 cannot	 approach	people	 directly,	 however	much	 it	may	want
to,	and	so	has	to	be	content	to	circumvent	them	with	presents.	I	want
to	give	Erna	a	book;	F.	meant	to	buy	something	in	my	name	and	give
it	 to	 Toni	 but	 has	 obviously	 forgotten,	 and	 by	 now	 is	 probably
forgetting	 it	deliberately	while	 reading	 the	 letters	 in	which	 I	 remind
her	of	it.	Can	you	suggest	something?	You,	after	all,	are	my	advisor	on
both	major	and	minor	issues.
But	 it’s	 getting	 late,	 I	 am	 bringing	 today’s	 air-,	 light-,	 and	water-
treatment	to	an	end,	putting	my	pencil	in	my	pocket,	and	am	about	to
stroll	home.

Kindest	regards,	yours,	Franz	K.

Didn’t	 you	 intend	 to	 send	 me	 more	 of	 your	 brother’s	 work?—
What	do	you	mean	when	you	complain	about	the	irksomeness	of
the	 early	 part	 of	 the	 week?—Needless	 to	 say,	 no	 one	 else	 is
reading	the	letters,	and	from	now	on	no	one	else	will.

To	Grete	Bloch
June	18,	1914

Dear	Fräulein	Grete,	again	merely	a	few	words.



Dr.	Weiss	is	taking	up	my	time	and	I	am	busy.	But	I	like	him	very
much.	 (My	 misgivings	 about	 his	 coming	 for	 my	 sake	 were	 greatly
exaggerated.)	 He	 brings	 with	 him	 the	 Berlin	 that	 I	 need:	 he	 is
enveloped	 by	 it.	 Pulls	 me,	 if	 no	 more	 than	 an	 inch,	 out	 of	 this
miserable	hole	of	an	office.	His	fears	for	me	are	greater	than	my	own,
or	rather	they	are	different,	or	better	still	partly	different;	he	(because
in	many	ways	I	am	conventional,	childish,	sober)	relieves	me	of	some
of	 my	 worries,	 returns	 to	 me,	 refreshed,	 some	 of	 my	 downtrodden
hopes;	 in	 short,	 I	 feel	 better	 than	 I	 have	 for	 weeks	 (he	 is	 leaving
tomorrow),	sleep	miserably,	nevertheless	better	than	before.

Kind	regards,	Franz	K.

To	Grete	Bloch
June	20	[presumably	24],	1914

Dear	Fräulein	Grete,	I	have	had	2	better	nights’	sleep	(after	Dr.	Weiss’s
departure	 I	 had	 some	 ghastly	 nights	 again),	 am	 now	 alone	 and	 can
examine	my	situation	more	calmly.	It	is	so	peculiar	that	with	my	head
as	clear	as	it	is	today,	I	can’t	talk	about	it	at	all.
A	 few	 days	 ago	 I	 spoke	 to	 one	 of	 the	 heads	 of	 a	 large	 firm	 of
underwear	 manufacturers,	 Joss	 and	 Löwenstein;	 his	 name	 is	 Eugen
Löwenstein.	The	discussion	turned	on	questions	of	organization;	he	is
just	 getting	 an	 American	 to	 reorganize	 the	 entire	 commercial	 and
technical	 side	 of	 his	 business.	Naturally,	 the	 first	 thing	 I	 thought	 of
was	your	machines.	They	have	them	at	the	factory,	but	they	want	to
get	 rid	 of	 them,	 the	people	don’t	 like	working	 them,	 they	 are	not	 a
success.	 Of	 course	 I	 replied	 that	 the	 machines,	 which	 from	 my
“experience”	are	excellent,	were	clearly	not	being	operated	properly,
and	that	the	operators	would	have	to	be	instructed	by	some	efficient
person,	for	example	by	a	young	lady	of	my	acquaintance	from	Berlin.
Yes,	he	said,	that	might	be	possible;	after	discussing	it	with	his	office
manager,	 he	 would	 be	 very	 pleased	 to	 get	 the	 young	 lady	 to	 come
here	 at	 his	 expense,	 however	 long	 the	 instruction	 might	 take.	 No
doubt	Lesti47	would	be	annoyed,	he	said,	for	he	keeps	writing	to	the
firm	 which	 keeps	 turning	 him	 down,	 but	 that	 didn’t	 matter.—This
Herr	 Löwenstein	 has	 now	 left,	 will	 be	 away	 until	 the	 beginning	 of
August,	when	I	am	to	approach	him	and	then	it	can	be	arranged.	Do
you	 want	 to?	Would	 it	 be	 possible?	 I	 should	 be	 pleased.	 Though	 I
don’t	know	if	you	are	still	entitled	to	intervene	in	the	Bohemian	side



of	the	business;	however,	if	this	firm	insists	on	having	you	and	no	one
else,	 then	surely	 for	 the	sake	of	good	business	some	means	could	be
found	to	enable	you	to	come.

Kindest	regards,	yours,	Franz	K.

To	Felice	Bauer’s	mother
June	24,	1914

Dear	Mother,
Your	 postcard	was	 delayed.	 Anything	 addressed	 to	 the	 apartment
instead	of	 the	office	goes	 to	 the	shop	where	 it	gets	mislaid	and	only
turns	 up	 again	 by	 chance,	 especially	 if	 my	 mother	 isn’t	 there.
Meanwhile	 I	hear	rumors	of	a	postcard	 for	me	whose	exact	contents
are	uncertain,	although	it	has	been	read.	Dear	Mother,	this	is	precisely
what	 happened	 to	 your	 postcard.	 Many	 thanks	 for	 your	 courtesy;
although	my	letter	to	Felice	did	as	usual	contain	something	important,
it’s	not	urgent;	it	can	wait.
I	was	saddened	by	your	remark	about	 the	 letter	you	expected	and
did	not	get.	Of	course	you	are	in	the	right,	that	goes	without	saying.
You	all	received,	entertained,	and	treated	my	parents,	my	sister,	and
me	with	 unimaginable	 kindness.	 I	 had	 every	 reason	 to	 be	 sincerely
grateful	 to	 you,	 to	 say	 so,	 and	 to	 put	 it	 in	writing.	 I	 did	 not	 do	 so.
Why?	Alas,	dear	Mother,	this	is	one	of	my	failings	of	which	you	will
never	 approve.	 In	 this	 case	 too	 it	 was	 not	 merely	 a	 question	 of
writing,	I	am	fully	aware	of	it,	even	though	writing	would	have	been
far	 less	 a	 matter	 of	 form	 than	 a	 matter	 of	 the	 heart.	 Nevertheless,
believe	me,	I	am	no	worse	than	someone	who	had	written.
And	 now	 I	 kiss	 your	 hand	 affectionately	 and	 beg	 you	 to	 give	my
regards	to	your	family	both	in	Berlin	and	elsewhere.

Yours,	Franz

To	Grete	Bloch
June	26,	1914

Dear	Fräulein	Grete,	you	wonder	why	I	don’t	write	 to	say	how	I	am
getting	 on.‡	 Because	 it’s	 hard	 to	 say.	 I	 sleep	 badly,	 for	 instance,
though	 far	 better	 than	 at	 the	 time	 of	 my	 previous	 complaints.	 I
thought	 I	 had	 discovered	 the	 reasons	 for	 not	 sleeping	 and	 hurled
myself	at	 them.	But	now	I	am	troubled	by	other	 things	again.	And	I



am	beginning	to	fear	that	it’s	all	a	delusion	behind	which	there	lies	in
wait	 the	 real	 core	 of	 the	 real	 misfortune,	 of	 which	 I	 know	 nothing
directly,	only	by	intolerable	threats.	How	about	the	main	reasons	for
your	silence?
What	 is	 that	 pain	 in	 your	 leg?	 Didn’t	 you	 have	 something	 of	 the
kind	before?
I	wrote	to	Erna,	but	too	late,	as	I	see	from	your	letter.	Tomorrow	I
shall	probably	go	to	Hellerau,48	at	least	I	have	announced	my	arrival.
I	don’t	know	if	I	shall	be	able	to	get	away	next	week,	we	shall	have	to
discuss	it	further.	Will	the	president’s	visit	enhance	your	prestige?
No,	I	can’t	write	any	more.	Many	things	keep	jostling	for	attention,
so	much	so	that	they	keep	each	other	down.
The	Bible	happens	to	be	lying	beside	me,	and	simply	to	derive	some
comfort	and	pass	it	on	to	you,	I	opened	it	three	times	and	eventually
found	this	sentence:	“In	His	hand	are	the	deep	places	of	the	earth;	the
strength	 of	 the	 hills	 is	 His	 also.”	 To	 me,	 alas,	 it	 sounds	 almost
meaningless.

Kindest	regards,	yours,	Franz	K.

I	was	about	to	seal	this	letter	when	I	happened	to	glance	up	and
see	 in	 a	 compartment	 of	 the	 desk	 a	 postcard	 with	 the
Charlottenburg	 postmark.	 Because	 I	 keep	 my	 papers	 in	 perfect
order,	 I	 am	 puzzled;	 then	 I	 see	 that	 it	 is	 the	 Schlossbrücke
postcard	which	 someone	 has	 secreted	 on	my	desk,	 and	which	 I
am	now	holding	in	my	hand	for	the	first	time.	Such	is	the	state	of
my	desk.

To	Grete	Bloch
June	30,	1914

Dear	 Fräulein	 Grete,	 no	 telephone	 call;	 instead	 a	 face-to-face.	 You
mustn’t	 talk	 like	 that,	 I	haven’t	 changed,	 am	merely	being	 tossed	 to
and	 fro,	 which	 inevitably	 tugs	 at	 my	 hand	 which	 holds	 your	 dear
hand.	 Be	 patient	 with	 me.	 After	 all,	 women	 are	 patient,	 but	 there,
perhaps	I	wear	out	the	best	of	women.	You	will	get	a	full-length	letter
the	day	after	tomorrow,	it’s	too	late	today.	I	wrote	to	F.	about	the	trip
to	Dresden,	I	shall	be	in	Berlin	in	a	fortnight’s	time,	so	whether	I	shall
be	 in	Dresden	 next	 Sunday	 I	 don’t	 know—when	writing	 to	 F.	 I	was
convinced	of	it,	but	when	writing	to	you	I’m	not.



Kindest	regards,	yours,	Franz	K.

To	Grete	Bloch
July	1,	1914

Dear	Fräulein	Grete,	late	again,	so	this	won’t	be	a	full-length	letter.	I
spend	a	 lot	of	 time	 in	 the	 fresh	air	and	 in	 the	water	but	 I	don’t	 feel
well,	all	my	joints	are	so	tired	that	they	ache;	when	I	am	at	home	I	do
nothing	 but	 lie	 on	 the	 sofa,	 admiring	 your	 efficiency	 and	 finding	 it
incomprehensible;	 a	 piece	 of	work	 I	 began	 is	 lying	 there,	 but	 I	 can
scarcely	lift	my	hand	to	resume	it.	Complaining	strikes	me	as	the	most
useless	thing	in	the	world,	yet	that	is	all,	really	all,	I	have	the	energy
for.	But,	as	you	have	noticed,	not	quite	enough	even	for	that.
You	 made	 a	 remark	 recently	 about	 jointly	 written	 postcards.	 I
thought	 about	 it.	 You	 are	 wrong,	 and	 right.	 I	 am	 delighted	 with
everything	I	get	 from	Berlin,	but	unknown	to	myself	 I	suppose	there
must	 also	 be	 a	 desire	 to	 have	 each	 one	 separately	 rather	 than
together;	I	love	the	individual,	not	so	the	community;	I	am	unsociable
to	the	point	of	madness,	not	for	myself	alone	but	for	all	those	I	love.	A
disease,	perhaps	a	curable	one.
F.	will	have	told	you	that	I	shall	go	to	Berlin	a	week	from	Sunday,
or	rather	be	going	on	my	vacation	via	Berlin.	So	I	don’t	know	whether
I	 shall	 be	 in	Dresden	 next	 Sunday;	 besides,	 I	 am	under	 a	 slight	 but
easily	 avoidable	 obligation	 to	 go	 and	 see	 my	 sister	 in	 the	 country
before	 going	 on	my	 vacation.	 It’s	more	 than	 likely,	 however,	 that	 I
shall	 stay	 in	Prague;	 I	 am	hardly	 fit	 to	 show	myself.	Will	 you	be	 in
Berlin	a	week	from	Sunday?
I	must	stop	now,	will	write	again	tomorrow.

Kindest	regards,	yours,	Franz	K.

The	pain	in	your	leg?	What	kind	of	pain?	How	did	the	president	honor
you?

To	Grete	Bloch
July	2,	1914

Dear	Fräulein	Grete,	the	frequency	of	my	letters	must	compensate	for
their	 emptiness,	 even	 if	 this	 may	 be	 creating	 two	 evils	 instead	 of



removing	one	defect.	I	feel	the	need	to	write	to	you,	but	am	too	weary
to	say	anything	except	to	send	you	my	kindest	regards	and	to	tell	you
that	 I	must	 see	you,	 if	not	 this	Sunday	 in	Dresden—I	 shall	probably
spend	the	whole	of	Sunday	stretched	on	the	boards	at	the	swimming
baths,	 following	with	closed	eyes	the	ups	and	downs	of	weariness	 in
my	 joints	 and	 muscles	 (a	 noble	 occupation)—then	 at	 least	 a	 week
from	Sunday	in	Berlin.

Yours,	Franz	K.

Copy	or	draft	of	a	letter	from	Grete	Bloch	to	Franz	Kafka49
July	3,	1914

Are	 the	 fears	 expressed	 in	 my	 letter	 of	 the	 day	 before	 yesterday,
which	 you	 probably	won’t	 get	 until	 today	 because	 in	 an	 attempt	 to
gain	 further	 time	 for	 reflection,	which	proved	 futile,	 I	 didn’t	mail	 it
until	 yesterday,	 are	 these	 fears	 not	 well	 founded?	 And	 justified	 by
your	 actions?	 Could	 anything	 appall	 me	 more	 than	 your	 letter	 of
yesterday,	and	the	nonarrival	of	a	letter	today,	a	bad	sign	in	view	of
your	usual	punctuality?	Words,	doctor,	all	but	fail	me.	If	you	are	not
deluding	yourself—can	I	still	hope	for	this	now,	after	all	these	proofs
to	the	contrary?—then	things	look	bad.	I	suddenly	see	the	situation	so
clearly,	and	am	in	despair.	The	fact	that	I	was	determined,	at	all	costs,
to	see	your	engagement	as	a	stroke	of	good	fortune	 for	both	of	you,
and	 considered	 it	 your	 destiny,	 undoubtedly	 creates	 an	 infinite
responsibility	to	which	I	no	longer	feel	equal.
I	 should	almost	 like	 to	ask	you	not	 to	 come	here	 if	 you	don’t	 feel

clear	in	your	mind,	firm	within	yourself,	and	full	of	enthusiasm.	I	had
only	a	brief	word	with	F.	After	all	these	letters,	I	hardly	dare	look	her
in	 the	 eye.—The	 thing	 you	 can	 hold	 against	 me	 is	 my	 ridiculous,
irresponsible	weakness	when	answering	your	previous	letters.

G.

To	Grete	Bloch
July	3,	1914

My	dear	Fräulein	Grete,	that	is	certainly	a	very	unambiguous	letter.	It
looks	as	though	I	have	convinced	you	at	last.	Sooner	than	F.,	 for	we
have	known	each	other	only	since	November,	whereas	it	took	almost
a	year	 to	convince	F.	 for	 the	 first	 time;	 to	 this,	however,	 I	must	add



that	at	the	beginning	of	that	year	my	state	of	mind	was	exceptional,
which	 makes	 the	 length	 of	 time	 it	 took	 to	 convince	 F.	 more
comprehensible.50
The	 sole	 object	 of	 our	 relationship,	 Fräulein	Grete	 (although	on	 a
basis	 of	 friendship	 which	 I	 hope	 cannot	 be	 shaken	 by	 any	 possible
revelation),	 was	 to	 convince	 you.	 You	 needn’t	 have	 quoted	 from
letters,	or	rather	the	fact	that	you	did	quote	is	not	enough.	So	far	as	I
am	 concerned,	 our	 relationship	 passed	 through	 not	 two	 but	 three
different	 phases.	 By	 which	 I	 mean	 the	 two	 days	 in	 Prague	 not
mentioned	 by	 you.	 I	 tried	 to	 tell	 you	 then	 the	 things	 that	 were
subsequently	 in	 the	 letters,	 and	 at	 that	 time	 I	was	 neither	 engaged,
nor	 was	 I	 striving	 to	 get	 engaged;	 there	 was,	 however,	 some	 inner
uneasiness.	 I	 was	 doubly	 uneasy	 because	 of	 the	 impossibility	 of
finding	 an	 answer	 to	 two	 questions:	 firstly,	 how	 will	 F.	 fare	 if	 she
hears	no	more	from	me	(at	that	time,	by	the	way,	simultaneous	with
your	arrival	came	a	letter	from	F.);	and	secondly,	how	will	I	fare.	The
prospects	 revealed	 by	 these	 two	 questions	 seemed	 unbearable.	 I
couldn’t	get	up	on	my	toes	at	that	time	and	start	searching	over	and
above	everything	 for	 the	prospects	 that	might	unfold	 if	 she	did	hear
from	me—that	I	couldn’t	do.
So	 now	 I	 have	 convinced	 you,	 Fräulein	 Grete,	 and	 you	 are
beginning	to	look	upon	me	not	as	F.’s	fiancé,	but	as	a	threat	to	F.	That
much	 is	 clear;	 your	 letter	 becomes	 ambiguous	 only	 toward	 the	 end
when	you	demand	for	F.	a	man	who	is	her	equal	in	various	respects.
Either,	Fräulein	Grete,	one	is	“cheerful,	high-spirited,	intelligent,	and
thoroughly	good,”	or	one	isn’t,	and	instead	is	melancholy,	ponderous,
self-absorbed,	and	possibly	striving	toward	the	good,	but	with	feeble
forces.	These	conditions	cannot	be	improved	deliberately;	the	human
fabric	 is	 not	 like	 water	 that	 can	 be	 poured	 from	 one	 glass	 into
another.	 Ultimately,	 however,	 one	 isn’t	 just	 melancholy	 and
ponderous,	but	one	is	also	obviously	not	in	perfect	health	either,	or	at
least	one	is	neurasthenic	to	one’s	very	depth.	No	doubt	all	this	is	quite
clear,	almost	 triumphantly	clear	at	 this	particular	 time	when	despite
every	possible	care,	and	 the	 fact	 that	 I	do	 little	work	 in	 the	office,	 I
am	 dying	 of	 exhaustion.	 Assuming	 I	 were	 cheerful,	 how	 could
cheerfulness	survive	a	situation	such	as	this?
You	ask,	or	you	merely	raise	the	question	of	my	behavior	in	relation
to	F.	 I	would	have	assumed	 that	F.	 knew	about	your	 letter	had	you
not	specifically	excluded	the	possibility.
Incidentally,	today	is	my	birthday,	so	quite	fortuitously	your	letter



acquires	a	special	solemnity.	(Apart	from	your	letter	and	two	others	of
little	importance,	I	also	received	an	extremely	unpleasant	letter	today.
Not	 that	 it	 matters;	 strangely	 enough,	 difficulties	 fortify	 me.)	 I	 am
absolutely	sure	of	your	kindness	and	sincerity,	and	in	this	assurance	I
kiss	your	hand.

Yours,	Franz	K.

Franz	Kafka’s	mother	to	Felice	Bauer’s	mother
[MONOGRAM	AT	HEAD	OF	PAGE:	H.K.]

Prague,	July	4,	1914
My	dear	Anna,
Your	nice,	kind	letter	has	put	me	to	shame	and	I	beg	you	not	to	be
angry	about	my	long	silence.	I	have	been	so	busy	lately	that	I	actually
have	not	had	the	time	to	sit	down	and	write.	I	am	in	much	the	same
position	as	you.	You	have	your	troubles	with	the	housekeeping,	I	have
mine	with	the	shop.	But	the	main	thing	is	that	we	are	all	well,	and	we
are	 glad	 to	 hear	 that	 Aunt	 Emilie	 is	 looking	 for	 a	 place	 for	 the
summer,	for	in	this	heat	such	as	we	are	having	in	Prague,	and	which
is	 probably	 no	 less	 in	 Berlin,	 the	 country	 is	 the	 only	 place	 to
recuperate	after	an	 indisposition.	Have	you	considered	Franzensbad?
51	In	any	case,	she	ought	to	consult	a	doctor.
We	had	a	very	good	rest	at	Franzensbad.	Twelve	days	ago	we	had	a
very	 pleasant	 visit	 from	 my	 brother	 Alfred	 from	 Madrid.
Unfortunately	he	stayed	for	only	4	days,	but	the	hours	he	spent	with
us	were	lovely.	He	was	sorry	not	to	be	able	to	pay	you	a	visit,	for	he
would	 like	 to	have	seen	and	embraced	our	dear	Felice.	However,	he
promised,	God	willing,	 to	 come	again	next	year,	 for	he	will	have	 to
attend	 the	 congress	 in	 Berlin,	 so	 he	 will	 have	 the	 opportunity	 of
combining	business	with	pleasure	and	will	come	and	see	you.	We	had
a	very	charming	letter	from	Karl,	your	kind	husband,	and	as	soon	as	I
can	 I	 will	 try	 to	 answer	 his	 friendly	 words,	 and	 would	 ask	 you	 to
forward	the	letter	to	him.
I	 take	 a	 keen	 interest	 in	 the	 apartment	 but	 unfortunately	 cannot
arrange	 anything	 until	 it	 has	 been	 vacated,	 probably	 not	 before
August	14th,	but	then	I	will	see	to	it	that	it	is	done	up	nicely.	I	am	not
sure	 if	 I	 remember	 whether	 a	 divan-bed	 is	 included	 in	 either	 the
bedroom	or	living-room	furniture;	one	must	be	practical	and	consider
the	possibility	of	their	having	a	visitor,	and	where	he	is	going	to	rest



his	 head.	 For	 this	 purpose	 I	 would	 provide	 on	 Franz’s	 behalf	 the
bedclothes—pillow,	 featherbed,	and	blanket—and	would	ask	you	 for
the	measurements	 of	 the	 bedcovers,	 so	 that	 they	would	 also	 fit	 the
beds	Felice	is	being	given.	Of	course	it	will	have	to	be	a	patent	divan-
bed	in	which	the	bedclothes	can	be	stored	during	the	day.	Please	let
me	know	about	this.
I	have	 just	 looked	at	my	watch	 to	 see	 that	 the	 time	 is	11	 P.M.	My
dear	Hermann	has	gone	 to	Radesovitz	 to	 see	 the	 children,	 and	 I	 am
sitting	 here	 writing,	 and	 thinking	 of	 you.	 During	 the	 day	 I	 find	 it
impossible	to	write	a	private	letter.	Left	in	peace	in	a	room	by	oneself,
it	gets	done	in	no	time.	Ottla	has	gone	to	bed	and	Franz	is	working	in
his	 room.	 I	 surprised	 him	 just	 now	 and	 saw	 him	 blissfully
contemplating	dear	Felice’s	photograph.	 It	 really	has	 come	out	well.
The	very	image	of	her.	Well,	I	am	coming	to	the	end	of	the	page,	I	can
barely	keep	my	eyes	open,	and	 so	 I	must	 close	with	kindest	 regards
from	me,	my	husband,	 and	 the	 children,	who	 are	 all	 fit	 and	well.	 I
embrace	you	in	cordial	friendship,

Julie	Kafka
To	Felice	Bauer’s	parents52
[LETTERHEAD:	Hotel	Askanische	Hof,	Berlin]

Berlin,	July	13,	1914
Now	I	no	longer	know	how	I	shall	or	may	address	you.
I	shall	not	come	to	see	you,	it	would	be	unnecessary	torture	for	us
all.	I	know	what	you	would	say	to	me.	You	know	how	I	would	take	it.
So	I	am	not	coming.
I	 shall	 probably	 go	 to	 Lübeck	 this	 afternoon.	 As	 a	 comparatively
slight	consolation,	but	nevertheless	as	a	consolation,	I	am	taking	with
me	 the	 thought	 that	we	can	and	will	 remain	on	 friendly	 terms	even
though	the	union	we	all	desired	has	now	been	recognized	by	everyone
to	 be	 impossible.	 No	 doubt	 Felice	 has	 convinced	 you	 as	 she	 has
convinced	me.	I	see	things	more	and	more	clearly.
Farewell,	 you	 have	 won	 my	 unconditional	 admiration,	 especially
since	 your	 handling	 of	 the	 situation	 yesterday;	 don’t	 think	 badly	 of
me.

With	gratitude,	Franz	K.

Franz	Kafka’s	mother	to	Felice	Bauer’s	mother



[MONOGRAM	AT	HEAD	OF	PAGE:	H.K.]
Prague,	July	20,	1914

My	dear	Anna,
I	cannot	call	you	anything	else,	for	I	am	well	disposed	toward	you.
Even	 if	 our	 children	 have	 parted,	 our	 friendship	 must	 not	 falter	 or
suffer	 as	 a	 result.	 I	 cannot	 understand	what	 has	 happened	 between
them,	 it	 is	 incomprehensible	 to	 me.	 On	 Tuesday	 there	 was	 a	 letter
from	Berlin	 from	Franz.	We	were	 very	 busy.	Dear	Hermann	handed
me	the	letter	unopened;	I	dropped	everything	and	went	to	the	office
in	order	not	to	be	disturbed	while	reading.	Anyone	seeing	me	reading
would	undoubtedly	have	been	horrified	by	my	appearance,	for	I	had
frozen	into	a	pillar	of	salt;	I	could	have	imagined	anything	rather	than
this.	I	felt	battered	for	the	rest	of	the	day	and	was	so	relieved	that	my
husband	 didn’t	 ask	 what	 Franz	 had	 said.	 He	 was	 so	 busy	 he	 had
forgotten	there	had	been	a	letter	from	Franz.	Not	until	the	next	day,
after	he	had	had	a	good	sleep,	did	 I	ask	him	 if	he	wasn’t	curious	 to
know	what	his	son	had	said,	and	then	I	read	him	the	letter.	You	can
imagine	how	he	felt.	You	would	be	doing	me	a	great	favor	if	you	sent
me	the	letter	that	was	so	disastrous,	for	I	cannot	imagine	what	was	in
it	 that	can	have	been	so	 terrible.53	 I	know	that	Franz,	 in	his	way,	 is
very	devoted	to	Felice.	But	he	has	never	had	the	gift	of	demonstrating
his	affection	like	other	people.	I	am	firmly	convinced	that	he	loves	me
most	 tenderly,	 and	yet	he	has	never	 shown	either	me,	his	 father,	or
his	 sisters	 any	 particular	 affection.	 Nevertheless	 he	 is	 the	 kindest
person	 imaginable.	His	money	he	 shares	with	his	 poorer	 colleagues,
since	for	himself	he	doesn’t	need	much.54	Perhaps	he	is	not	made	for
marriage,	 since	 his	 only	 endeavor	 is	 his	 writing,	 which	 is	 the	most
important	 thing	 in	 his	 life.	 For	 all	 that,	 I	 was	 counting	 on	 Felice’s
intelligence,	for	I	said	to	myself	that	a	clever	woman	is	able	to	change
a	man.	Now	all	my	hopes	are	dashed.	But	perhaps	even	now	we	need
not	 throw	 in	 the	 sponge.	 The	 children	 ought	 not	 to	 sever	 their
friendship	altogether;	they	should	put	each	other	to	the	test	for	a	year;
after	all,	there	is	no	hurry	for	them	to	get	married;	they	are	still	young
and	can	wait.	This	is	my	opinion,	and	now	I	ask	for	yours.
Today	 there	 arrived	 from	 my	 brother	 Alfred	 in	 Madrid	 a	 letter
which	 upset	me	 all	 over	 again.	He	 enclosed	 a	 check	 for	 the	 sum	of
1000	kronen	as	a	wedding	present	for	Franz	and	Felice.	I	wrote	him	a
letter	this	evening	in	which	I	inquired	how	best	to	return	the	money
to	him.	I	am	writing	this	letter	at	10	P.M.,	for	during	the	day	I	haven’t



a	minute.	Felice	should	keep	the	bracelet	 I	gave	her	 in	memory	of	a
motherly	friend.	I	must	close	now,	for	I	am	coming	to	the	end	of	the
page.	I	send	my	affectionate	regards	to	you	as	well	as	to	all	your	dear
ones	and	remain	in	friendship,

yours,	Julie	Kafka

Kindest	regards	from	my	dear	husband	and	children.

Franz	Kafka’s	mother	to	Felice	Bauer’s	mother
[MONOGRAM	AT	HEAD	OF	PAGE:	H.K.]

Prague,	August	7,	1914
My	dear	Anna,
I	should	have	answered	your	kind	letter	long	ago,	but	I	am	sure	you
will	 forgive	me,	 for	 there	 is	 so	much	 to	worry	 about	 in	 these	 hard
times	and	my	head	 is	 so	numb	 that	 I	am	 incapable	of	a	 single	clear
thought.	Both	our	sons-in-law	have	joined	up;	our	daughter	Elly	with
her	 two	 children	 is	 living	 with	 us	 in	 Franz’s	 room,	 and	 Franz	 is
lodging	 in	 Peppo’s55	 apartment	 on	 Bilek	 Gasse,	 since	 Vally	 and	 the
child	are	still	with	her	parents-in-law	 in	Böhmisch-Brod.56	 Isn’t	your
son-in-law	 a	 soldier?	Are	 none	 of	 your	mischpoche	 [kith	 and	 kin]	 in
the	army?	Things	are	very	gloomy	here	 in	Prague.	True,	 the	shop	 is
kept	 open,	 but	 there	 isn’t	 a	 customer	 to	 be	 seen	 all	 day.	We	 don’t
really	mind	about	this,	provided	our	dear	children	return	safely	before
long.	 Needless	 to	 say,	 all	 this	 has	 pushed	 Franz’s	 affairs	 into	 the
background.	 It	 is	 costing	 us	 money	 too,	 since	 we	 have	 to	 pay	 6
months’	rent	for	the	apartment.	What	are	all	your	children	doing?	Are
they	still	away	on	vacation	or,	which	is	more	likely,	back	in	Berlin	by
now?	This	year	 the	 resorts	made	no	profits,	 for	 in	 the	general	panic
everyone	returned	 from	the	country,	 from	health	 resorts	and	seaside
places.	 How	 is	 dear	 Aunt	 Emilie?	 She	 is	 probably	 still	 with	 you.	 I
assume	your	dear	Karl	is	also	at	home	now,	since	all	business	lies	idle
these	days.	I	hardly	read	the	papers	now,	for	the	more	one	reads	the
more	nervous	one	becomes.	We	kept	getting	news	 from	our	 sons-in-
law	 until	 the	 third	 of	 this	 [month],	 but	 since	 then	 they	 haven’t
communicated	at	all;	they	have	probably	left	the	place	in	which	they
originally	 joined	 up,	 and	 the	 mail	 service	 is	 not	 functioning
everywhere.	As	a	result	our	daughters	are	even	more	upset.	There	 is



no	 end	 to	 the	worries	 of	war.	We	have	 to	 entrust	 everything	 to	 the
Almighty.	Owing	to	the	war,	your	promised	visit	to	us	may	have	to	be
postponed;	 but	 it	 must	 not	 be	 abandoned;	 you	 must	 keep	 your
promise	and	come	and	see	us.	You	will	be	welcomed	by	all	of	us	with
open	arms.
And	 now	 farewell,	 my	most	 affectionate	 regards	 to	 all	 your	 dear

ones,	and	let	me	embrace	you	in	warm	friendship,
yours,	Julie	Kafka

Kindest	regards	from	my	dear	husband	and	all	the	children.

To	Grete	Bloch57
October	15,	1914

It	 is	 a	 strange	 coincidence,	 Fräulein	 Grete,	 that	 your	 letter	 should
have	 arrived	 today.	 I	 don’t	want	 to	 say	with	what	 it	 coincides;	 that
concerns	me	alone	and	 the	 thoughts	 that	accompanied	me	 to	bed	at
around	3	o’clock	this	morning.
Your	letter	was	a	great	surprise	to	me.	It	didn’t	surprise	me	that	you

wrote.	Why	 shouldn’t	 you	write	 to	me?	You	do	 say	 that	 I	hate	you;
but	this	isn’t	true.	If	everyone	were	to	hate	you,	I	wouldn’t	hate	you,
and	 not	 merely	 because	 I	 haven’t	 the	 right	 to.	 It’s	 true	 that	 at	 the
Askanische	Hof	you	sat	in	judgment	over	me—it	was	horrible	for	you,
for	 me,	 for	 everyone—but	 it	 only	 appeared	 to	 be	 so;	 in	 fact	 I	 was
sitting	in	your	place,	which	to	this	day	I	have	not	left.
You	are	completely	mistaken	about	F.	I	am	not	saying	this	to	elicit

details	 from	 you.	 I	 can’t	 think	 of	 any	 details—my	 imagination	 has
scoured	this	ground	so	often	that	I	can	trust	it—I	say	I	can’t	think	of
any	details	 that	could	convince	me	that	you	are	not	mistaken.	What
you	 imply	 is	 absolutely	 impossible;	 it	 makes	me	miserable	 to	 think
that	 for	 some	 incomprehensible	 reason	 F.	may	 be	 deceiving	 herself.
But	that	too	is	impossible.
I	have	always	considered	your	interest	to	be	genuine	and	unsparing

of	 yourself.	Nor	was	 it	 easy	 for	 you	 to	write	 this	 last	 letter.	 I	 thank
you	for	it	most	sincerely.

Franz	K.

[TELEGRAM,	handed	in	at	Prague,	October	27,	1914]



Felice	Bauer,	Berlin,	Lindström,	Gr.	Frankfurter	Str.	137
letter	follows	slowly	feeling	better	kind	regards

[MONOGRAM	AT	HEAD	OF	PAGE:	H.K.]
[Late	October–early	November	1914]

As	 far	 as	 I	 am	 concerned,	 Felice,	 nothing	 whatever	 has	 changed
between	 us	 in	 the	 past	 3	 months,	 either	 for	 the	 better,	 or	 for	 the
worse.	Needless	to	say,	I	am	ready	at	your	first	call,	and	would	have
replied	 without	 fail	 and	 by	 return	 to	 your	 earlier	 letter	 if	 I	 had
received	 it.	Actually,	 it	had	not	occurred	 to	me	 to	write	 to	you;	 the
futility	 of	 letters	 and	 the	 written	 word	 in	 general	 had	 become	 too
apparent	 at	 the	 Askanische	 Hof;	 but	 since	 my	 head	 (even	 with	 its
aches,	 above	 all	 today)	 has	 remained	 the	 same,	 it	 has	 not	 failed	 to
think	and	dream	of	you,	and	the	life	we	lead	together	in	my	mind	has
only	occasionally	been	bitter,	most	of	the	time	peaceful	and	happy.	As
a	matter	of	fact,	on	one	occasion	I	did	mean	not	actually	to	write	but
to	send	you	a	message	through	someone	(you	will	never	guess	who,	it
was	 an	 exceptional	 opportunity),	 a	message	 conceived	while	 falling
asleep	about	4	in	the	morning,	the	habitual	hour	for	my	first	sleep.
But	the	main	reason	why	it	has	not	occurred	to	me	to	write	was	that
the	most	important	aspect	of	our	relationship	really	seemed	to	me	to
be	 quite	 clear.	 For	 ages	 you	were	mistaken	 in	 referring	 so	 often	 to
what	had	been	left	unsaid.	What	was	lacking	was	not	discussion,	but
belief.	Because	you	were	unable	to	believe	the	things	you	heard	and
saw,	 you	 thought	 there	 were	 things	 that	 had	 been	 left	 unsaid.	 You
were	unable	to	appreciate	the	immense	power	my	work	has	over	me;
you	 did	 appreciate	 it,	 but	 by	 no	means	 fully.	 As	 a	 result	 you	were
bound	to	misinterpret	everything	that	my	worries	over	my	work,	and
only	 my	 worries	 over	 my	 work,	 produced	 in	 me	 in	 the	 way	 of
peculiarities	 which	 disconcerted	 you.	 Moreover,	 these	 peculiarities
(odious	peculiarities,	 I	admit,	odious	above	all	 to	myself)	manifested
themselves	more	with	you	than	with	anyone	else.	That	was	inevitable,
and	 had	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 spite.	 You	 see,	 you	 were	 not	 only	 the
greatest	friend,	but	at	the	same	time	the	greatest	enemy,	of	my	work,
at	 least	 from	 the	 point	 of	 view	 of	 my	 work.	 Thus,	 though
fundamentally	 it	 loved	you	beyond	measure,	 equally	 it	had	 to	 resist
you	with	all	its	might	for	the	sake	of	self-preservation.	It	had	to	do	so
in	every	single	detail.	I	thought	of	it,	for	instance,	when	having	a	meal
one	 evening	 with	 your	 sister	 consisting	 almost	 exclusively	 of	 meat.



Had	you	been	there,	I	would	probably	have	ordered	almonds.
Nor	was	my	silence	at	 the	Askanische	Hof	due	 to	 spite.	What	you
said	was	so	clear	 I	have	no	wish	to	repeat	 it;	but	 it	 included	certain
things	 that	 ought	 to	 be	 almost	 impossible	 for	 one	 person	 to	 say	 to
another.	 True,	 you	 didn’t	 say	 them	 until	 after	 I	 had	 been	 silent	 for
some	time,	or	had	stammered	some	inconsequential	words.	And	even
then	 you	 waited	 a	 long	 time	 for	 me	 to	 say	 something.	 I	 no	 longer
object	 to	 your	 having	 brought	 along	 Frl.	 Bl[och];	 after	 all,	 I	 had
almost	 discredited	 you	 in	 that	 letter	 to	 her;	 she	 had	 a	 right	 to	 be
present.	But	that	you	should	have	allowed	your	sister	[Erna],	whom	I
hardly	 knew	 at	 the	 time,	 to	 come	 along	 as	 well—that	 I	 could	 not
understand.	 However,	 I	 was	 only	 slightly	 disconcerted	 by	 their
presence;	 had	 I	 been	 capable	 of	 saying	 anything	 decisive,	 I	 might
possibly	 have	 kept	 silent	 out	 of	 spite.	 That	 is	 possible,	 but	 I	 had
nothing	decisive	to	say.	I	realized	that	all	was	lost;	I	also	realized	that
even	 then,	at	 the	 last	moment,	 I	 could	 save	 the	 situation	by	making
some	startling	confession,	but	I	had	no	startling	confession	to	make.	I
loved	 you	 then	 as	 I	 do	 now;	 I	 knew	 that	 though	 innocent,	 you	 had
been	 made	 to	 suffer	 for	 two	 years	 as	 even	 the	 guilty	 ought	 not	 to
suffer;	but	I	also	realized	that	you	could	not	understand	my	position.
What	ought	I	to	have	done?	Precisely	what	I	did:	join	you,	keep	silent
or	 say	 something	very	 silly,	 listen	 to	 the	 story	about	 the	 funny	 cab-
driver,	and	gaze	at	you	with	the	feeling	that	it	was	for	the	last	time.
When	 I	 say	 that	 you	 could	 not	 understand	my	 position,	 I	 do	 not
profess	 to	 know	 what	 you	 ought	 to	 have	 done.	 Had	 I	 known,	 I
wouldn’t	have	kept	it	from	you.	I	was	continually	trying	to	explain	my
position	 to	you—and,	what’s	more,	you	obviously	understood	 it,	but
couldn’t	bring	yourself	to	accept	it.	In	me	there	have	always	been,	and
still	 are,	 two	 selves	wrestling	with	 each	 other.	 One	 of	 them	 is	 very
much	as	you	would	wish	him	 to	be,	and	by	 further	development	he
could	achieve	the	little	he	lacks	in	order	to	fulfill	your	wishes.	None	of
the	things	you	reproached	me	with	at	the	Askanische	Hof	applied	to
him.	The	other	self,	however,	thinks	of	nothing	but	work,	which	is	his
sole	 concern;	 it	 has	 the	 effect	 of	making	 even	 the	meanest	 thoughts
appear	quite	normal;	the	death	of	his	dearest	friend	would	seem	to	be
no	more	than	a	hindrance—if	only	a	temporary	one—to	his	work;	this
meanness	 is	 compensated	 for	 by	 the	 fact	 that	 he	 is	 also	 capable	 of
suffering	for	his	work.	These	two	selves	are	locked	in	combat,	but	it	is
no	ordinary	fight	where	two	pairs	of	fists	strike	out	at	each	other.	The
first	self	is	dependent	upon	the	second;	he	would	never,	for	inherent



reasons	 never,	 be	 able	 to	 overpower	 him;	 on	 the	 contrary,	 he	 is
delighted	when	the	second	succeeds,	and	if	the	second	appears	to	be
losing,	 the	 first	will	 kneel	 down	 at	 his	 side,	 oblivious	 of	 everything
but	him.	This	is	how	it	is,	Felice.	And	yet	they	are	locked	in	combat,
and	yet	 they	could	both	be	yours;	 the	trouble	 is	 that	they	cannot	be
changed	unless	both	were	to	be	destroyed.
What	this	actually	means	 is	 that	you	ought	to	have	accepted	it	all
completely,	ought	to	have	realized	that	whatever	was	happening	here
was	also	happening	for	you,	and	that	everything	the	work	requires	for
itself,	 which	 looks	 like	 obstinacy	 and	 moodiness,	 is	 nothing	 but	 an
expedient,	necessary	partly	for	its	own	sake	and	partly	forced	on	me
by	 the	 circumstances	 of	 my	 life,	 so	 utterly	 hostile	 to	 this	 work.
Imagine	 the	 way	 I	 live	 at	 present.	 Alone	 in	 my	 eldest	 sister’s
apartment.	She,	because	my	brother-in-law	is	 in	the	army,	 is	staying
with	my	parents.	Unless	certain	things	interfere,	above	all	the	factory,
my	 timetable	 is	 as	 follows:	 Office	 until	 2:30,	 followed	 by	 lunch	 at
home,	 followed	by	1–2	hours	reading	newspapers,	writing	 letters,	or
doing	work	for	the	office;	then	up	to	my	apartment	(you	know	it)	to
sleep,	 or	 just	 to	 rest;	 then	 at	 9	 down	 to	 my	 parents	 for	 supper	 (a
decent	walk),	 back	 again	 by	 tram	 at	 10,	 and	 then	 to	 stay	 awake	 as
long	 as	 my	 strength,	 or	 fear	 of	 the	 following	 morning,	 fear	 of
headaches	at	the	office,	permits.	In	the	course	of	the	last	three	months
this	is	the	second	evening	I	have	spent	without	working;	the	first	was
about	 a	 month	 ago,	 when	 I	 was	 too	 tired.	 I	 also	 had	 a	 fortnight’s
vacation58	 lately,	and	during	this	period	of	course	my	timetable	was
slightly	 altered	 insofar	 as	 this	was	 possible	 in	 the	 rush	 of	 that	 brief
fortnight	 and	 the	 fearful	 knowledge	 that	 the	 days	were	 passing.	 On
average	I	sat	at	my	desk	until	5	 in	the	morning,	once	even	till	7:30,
then	 I	 slept;	 during	 the	 last	 few	 days	 of	 the	 vacation	 I	managed	 to
sleep	properly,	until	1	or	2	 P.M.,	 and	 from	 then	on	 I	was	 really	 free,
and	took	time	off	until	the	evening.
You	may	be	able	to	accept	the	kind	of	life	I	lead	during	a	vacation,
Felice,	 but	 not	 the	 life	 I	 normally	 lead—at	 least	 you	 haven’t	 been
ready	to	do	so	as	yet.	Those	hours	of	the	day	that	I	consider	to	be	the
only	ones	lived	according	to	my	needs,	I	spend	sitting	or	lying	in	these
three	silent	rooms,	see	no	one,	not	even	my	friends,	except	for	Max	for
a	few	minutes	on	the	way	home	from	the	office	and—am	not	happy,
certainly	not,	and	yet	content	at	times	at	the	thought	that	I	am	doing
my	duty,	as	far	as	the	circumstances	permit.



I	 have	 always	 admitted	 to	 this	 way	 of	 life;	 it	 was	 always	 the
doubtful	 question	 as	well	 as	 the	 test.	While	 you	 never	 said	 “No”	 in
reply	 to	 that	 question,	 your	 “Yes”	 never	 encompassed	 the	 entire
question.	But	the	gap	left	open	by	your	reply	was	filled,	as	far	as	you
were	 concerned,	 Felice,	with	 hatred,	 or,	 if	 that’s	 too	 strong	 a	word,
with	dislike.	It	started	while	you	were	in	Frankfurt;	I	am	not	aware	of
the	immediate	cause,	there	may	not	even	have	been	one;	at	any	rate,
it	was	in	your	letters	from	Frankfurt	that	your	dislike	first	appeared	in
the	way	in	which	you	responded	to	my	concern	about	you,	in	the	way
in	 which	 you	 showed	 your	 reserve.	 You	 yourself	 probably	 did	 not
realize	 it	 at	 the	 time,	 but	 later	 on	 you	must	 have	 been	 aware	 of	 it.
What,	 after	 all,	 were	 those	 fears	 you	 kept	 referring	 to	 later	 in	 the
Tiergarten	 and	 which	 forced	 you	 more	 often	 into	 silence	 than	 into
speech?	 What	 were	 they	 but	 dislike	 of	 my	 way	 of	 life,	 as	 well	 as
indirectly	of	my	intentions,	which	you	could	not	reconcile	with	yours,
which	 gave	 you	 offense?	 I	 can	 see	 you	 with	 tears	 in	 your	 eyes
listening	to	Dr.	W[eiss]—that	was	fear.	That	evening	(these	are	a	few,
perhaps	not	always	appropriate	examples!)	before	I	went	to	see	your
parents	and	you	were	unable	to	give	a	definite	answer—that	was	fear.
In	Prague	when	you	complained	of	certain	things	about	me—that	was
fear.	Over	and	over	again,	fear.	I	say	fear	rather	than	dislike,	but	the
two	feelings	merged.	And	the	things	you	finally	said	at	the	Askanische
Hof,	 weren’t	 they	 the	 eruption	 of	 all	 this?	 Were	 you	 still	 in	 doubt
when	you	heard	yourself	 speak?	Didn’t	 you	 even	use	 the	 expression
that	 you	would	 be	 bound	 to	 lose	 yourself	 if	 you——?	 And	 even	 in
today’s	 letter,	Felice,	 I	notice	passages	that	could	still	be	due	to	that
fear.	You	must	not	misunderstand	me,	Felice.	That	dislike	was	there,
yet	in	the	eyes	of	the	whole	wide	world	you	had	decided	to	defy	it.	It
might	have	turned	out	well	in	the	end,	as	in	happy	moments	I	myself
hoped	it	would.	But	that’s	not	the	point.	You	want	an	explanation	for
my	behavior	last	time,	and	this	explanation	lies	in	the	fact	that	your
fears,	your	dislike,	were	constantly	before	my	eyes.	It	was	my	duty	to
protect	my	work,	 which	 alone	 gives	me	 the	 right	 to	 live,	 and	 your
fears	proved,	at	 least	made	me	fear	(with	far	more	unbearable	fears)
that	here	 lay	 the	 gravest	 danger	 to	my	work.	 “I	was	nervous,	 I	was
worn	out,	I	thought	I	had	reached	the	end	of	my	tether,”	that’s	what
you	 write,	 and	 that’s	 how	 it	 was.	 Never	 before	 had	 the	 two	 selves
fought	 so	 hard	 as	 they	 did	 then.	 And	 it	 was	 then	 that	 I	 wrote	 that
letter	to	Frl.	Bl[och].
But	perhaps	I	have	not	quite	justified	the	reasons	for	my	fears;	after



all,	your	explanations	at	the	Ask.	H.	[Askanische	Hof]	were	not	made
until	 later;	 I	 must	 not	 make	 use	 of	 them	 now.	 One	 of	 the	 clearest
examples,	 however,	 is	 the	 disagreement	 about	 the	 apartment;	 I	was
dismayed	by	every	detail	of	your	scheme,	though	I	could	not	oppose	it
in	any	way,	and	no	doubt	everyone	would	have	insisted	that	you	were
right.	It	is	merely	that	you	yourself	ought	not	to	have	insisted.	What
you	wanted	was	perfectly	reasonable:	a	pleasant,	pleasantly	furnished,
family	apartment,	such	as	is	inhabited	by	all	families	of	both	your	and
my	social	standing.	Altogether	you	wanted	no	more	than	these	people
have	(they	were	mentioned	again	in	today’s	letter,	they	are	the	ones
into	whose	“lap	 things	 fall”),	but	what	 they	have,	you	wanted	 in	 its
entirety.	 On	 one	 occasion—by	 which	 time	 I	 was	 approaching	 my
worst	 fears—I	asked	you	to	cancel	 the	ceremonies	 in	 the	synagogue;
you	 didn’t	 answer;	 in	 my	 apprehensive	 state	 I	 assumed	 you	 had
resented	my	request,	and	at	the	A.H.	[Askanische	Hof]	you	did	in	fact
mention	this	request.	But	your	whole	idea	about	the	apartment,	what
does	 it	 show?	It	 shows	that	you	agree	with	 the	others,	not	with	me;
for	these	others,	however,	a	home,	quite	legitimately,	has	an	entirely
different	meaning	to	the	one	it	would	have	had	for	me.	These	others,
when	they	get	married,	are	very	nearly	satiated,	and	marriage	to	them
is	 but	 the	 final,	 great,	 delicious	mouthful.	 Not	 so	 for	me,	 I	 am	 not
satiated,	 I	 haven’t	 started	a	business	 that’s	 expected	 to	 expand	 from
one	year	of	marriage	to	another;	I	don’t	need	a	permanent	home	from
whose	bourgeois	orderliness	I	propose	to	run	this	business—not	only
do	 I	 not	 need	 this	 kind	 of	 home,	 it	 actually	 frightens	 me.	 I	 am	 so
hungry	 for	my	work	 that	 it	makes	me	 feel	 limp;	here,	 however,	 the
conditions	are	antagonistic	to	my	work,	so	if	I	set	up	house	according
to	your	wishes	under	these	conditions,	it	would	mean—if	not	in	fact,
at	 any	 rate	 symbolically—that	 I	 am	 attempting	 to	 make	 these
conditions	permanent,	which	is	the	worst	thing	that	can	befall	me.
Somehow	I	should	like	to	narrow	down	what	I	have	just	said,	and
so	define	it	more	clearly.	You	would	be	quite	justified	in	asking	what
kind	of	proposals	 I	 expected	of	 you	as	 regards	our	home.	Actually	 I
can’t	answer	that	question.	The	most	apposite	and	most	obvious	from
the	point	of	view	of	my	work	would	have	been	 to	 throw	everything
away,	and	to	look	for	an	apartment	even	higher	up	than	the	4th	floor,
not	 in	 Prague,	 elsewhere;	 but	 it	 appears	 that	 neither	 you	 nor	 I	 are
equipped	 to	 live	 in	 self-appointed	 misery.	 Perhaps	 I	 am	 even	 less
equipped	to	do	so	than	you.	Well,	so	far	neither	of	us	has	tried	it.	So
could	 I	 really	expect	 the	 suggestion	 to	 come	 from	you?	Not	exactly;



though	had	you	suggested	it	I	should	have	been	so	happy	I	wouldn’t
have	known	what	to	do,	but	I	certainly	didn’t	expect	it.	But	certainly	a
compromise	could	or	rather	would	have	been	found.	And	you	would
have	found	it,	without	so	much	as	looking,	quite	naturally,	 if	only—
yes,	 if	 only	 it	 had	 not	 been	 for	 those	 fears,	 that	 dislike,	 which
prevented	you	from	doing	the	things	that	were	essential	to	me	and	to
our	life	together.	Indeed,	I	could	have	gone	on	hoping	that	agreement
might	yet	be	reached,	but	these	would	have	been	merely	hopes;	but	at
that	 moment	 there	 were	 signs	 of	 the	 precise	 opposite	 which	 were
bound	to	frighten	me,	and	from	which	I	had	to	protect	myself	as	long
as	I	wanted	you	to	have	a	husband	who	was	alive.
Now	of	 course	you	 can	 turn	 the	whole	 thing	around	and	 say	 that

you,	 your	 very	 nature	 was	 as	 dangerously	 threatened	 as	 mine,	 and
that	your	fears	were	as	fully	justified	as	mine.	I	don’t	believe	that	this
was	the	case.	For	I	 loved	you	in	your	true	nature,	and	feared	it	only
when	it	met	my	work	with	hostility.	And	since	I	loved	you	so	much	I
was	bound	to	help	you	to	protect	yourself.	But	even	this	is	not	strictly
true;	you	certainly	were	endangered,	but	then	didn’t	you	want	to	be
endangered	at	all?	Never?	Not	at	all?
What	I	have	said	is	not	new,	I	may	have	summarized	it	in	a	slightly

different	way,	but	it’s	nothing	new.	What	is	new	is	that	it	doesn’t	form
part	of	a	regular	correspondence,	and	this,	as	well	as	the	fact	that	you
asked	 for	 this	 summing-up,	 gives	 me	 hope	 of	 receiving	 a	 clear-cut
answer.	I	am	eager	for	your	reply.	You	must	answer,	Felice,	no	matter
how	much	you	may	object	to	my	letter.	I	am	extremely	impatient	for
your	 answer.	 When	 I	 stopped	 writing	 this	 letter	 yesterday—it	 was
getting	late—and	went	to	bed,	I	slept	for	a	while,	but	when,	later	on,	I
woke	up	and	couldn’t	get	to	sleep	again	until	morning,	all	our	sorrows
and	woes—this	 really	 is	 something	we	have	 in	common—came	over
me	undiminished,	as	in	the	worst	days.	After	all,	everything	still	hangs
together,	not	one	of	 these	worries	has	been	resolved,	as	soon	as	one
allows	it	all	to	come	a	little	closer.	It	tears	at	one	this	way	and	that,	as
though	gripping	one	by	the	tongue.	There	were	moments	during	last
night	when	I	thought	I	had	crossed	the	borderline	of	madness,	and	I
didn’t	know	how	to	save	myself.	So	you	will	answer	my	letter,	and	if
you	want	to	be	especially	kind,	please	notify	me	by	telegram	as	soon
as	you	receive	this.
You	mention	my	correspondence	with	Erna.	I	don’t	know	what	you

mean	 when	 you	 say	 I	 should	 write	 to	 you	 irrespective	 of	 this
correspondence.	 It	 so	 happens	 that	 I	 shall	 be	 writing	 to	 Erna



tomorrow.	 So	 I’ll	 tell	 her	 that	 I	 have	written	 to	 you.	 Erna	 has	 been
unimaginably	kind	to	me,	and	to	you,	too.59

Franz

[TELEGRAM,	handed	in	at	Prague,	November	3,	1914]

Felice	Bauer,	Berlin,	Gr.	Frankfurter	Str.	137
letter	on	way	kind	regards	elsa	brod

Franz	Kafka’s	mother	to	the	Bauer	family	on	the	death	of	Felice’s	father60
[MONOGRAM	AT	HEAD	OF	PAGE:	H.K.]

Prague,	November	27,	1914
My	dear	ones,
We	have	 conveyed	 our	 condolences	 to	 you	 by	 telegram,	 but	 from
the	bottom	of	my	heart	 I	 feel	 like	writing	 to	express	once	more	our
sincerest	sympathy	on	the	grievous	loss	you	have	suffered.	Words	are
inadequate	to	describe	our	grief	on	receipt	of	your	sad	news.	I	know
any	efforts	to	console	you	would	be	in	vain;	time	alone	can	ease	your
pain.	You,	my	dear	good	Anna,	will	have	to	try	and	carry	on	for	your
children’s	sake,	for	after	all,	when	you	think	it	over,	dying	is	not	the
worst	that	can	happen,	especially	if	death	comes	peacefully,	as	it	did
to	your	dear	husband;	 this	must	be	a	consolation	to	you	all	 in	 these
sad	days.
Very	likely	the	war	is	largely	responsible	even	for	this	loss,	for	the
daily	tensions	are	bound	to	leave	their	mark.
We	 too	 have	 fearful	 worries.	 Our	 son-in-law	 Peppo	 came	 home
three	weeks	ago	with	a	wounded	hand.	We	still	do	not	know	how	long
it	will	take	to	heal.	Karl	sends	us	news	from	time	to	time.	My	entire
family	 feels	 deeply	 for	 you	 in	 your	 great	 sorrow,	 above	 all	 my
husband	who	loved	the	departed	like	a	true	friend.	We	too	suffered	a
painful	 loss	 6	 weeks	 ago.	 My	 husband’s	 eldest	 brother,	 Filip	 Kafka
from	Kolin,	died	after	a	short	illness.	He	was	in	his	68th	year	and	his
only	surviving	brother.	Two	younger	ones	preceded	him	to	the	grave.
Thus	one	after	another	passes	on.
Will	you	please	convey	our	sympathy	to	dear	Aunt	Emilie;	 for	her
too	it	is	a	great	loss	from	which	she	will	find	it	hard	to	recover.
And	now	farewell,	and	let	me	assure	you	of	our	constant	friendship,

especially	from	your	Julie	Kafka



January	25,	19151
Shall	I	sum	up,	F.?	To	begin	with	an	observation,	as	true	as	ever.	I	put
pen	 to	 paper	 and	 am	 close	 to	 you	 at	 once,	 closer	 than	 if	 I	 were
standing	by	the	sofa.	Here	you	do	not	upset	me,	here	you	do	not	avoid
my	 eyes,	 my	 thoughts,	 my	 questions;	 you	 do	 not	 avoid	 them	 even
when	you	are	silent.	Could	it	be	that	here	we	are	in	the	apartment	in
the	attic,	with	the	church	clock	as	our	grandfather	clock?	It’s	possible.
We	 have	 established	 the	 fact	 that	 our	 time	 together	 was	 not
pleasant.	And	that’s	putting	it	mildly.	We	may	not	have	spent	a	single
minute	 together	 entirely	 free	 of	 strain.	 I	 remember	Christmas	 1912.
Max	 was	 in	 Berlin	 and	 thought	 he	 had	 better	 prepare	 you	 for	 a
horrible	letter.	You	promised	to	be	brave,	but	said	something	like	this:
“It	 is	 very	 strange,	we	write	 to	 each	 other	 quite	 regularly	 and	 very
often,	I	have	had	a	great	many	letters	from	him,	I	would	like	to	help
him,	but	it	is	very	difficult,	he	makes	it	so	difficult	for	me,	we	never
seem	 to	 get	 any	 closer.”	 That	 is	 still—try	 to	 understand—the	 way
things	are,	for	both	of	us.	The	one	realizes	it	sooner,	the	other	later;
the	 one	 forgets	 it	 the	moment	 the	 other	 remembers.	 But	 one	would
think	 it	 could	 easily	 be	 remedied.	When	 one	 cannot	 get	 closer,	 one
simply	goes	 further	away.	But	 that	again	 is	 impossible.	The	signpost
points	in	one	direction	only.
This	 is	 the	 first	merciless	 fact.	 The	 second	 lies	within	 ourselves.	 I
have	noticed	that	each	of	us	is	merciless	toward	the	other;	this	is	not
because	one	does	not	mean	enough	to	the	other,	nevertheless	we	are
without	 mercy—you	 probably	 in	 all	 innocence,	 hence	 without	 any
feeling	 of	 guilt,	 thus	without	 the	 agony	 of	 that	 feeling.	Not	 so	with
me.	Indeed,	it	may	be	a	misfortune	that	I	am	unable	to	quarrel;	it	is	as
though	 I	 actually	 expected	a	miracle	 to	make	me	as	 convincing	as	 I
long	to	be,	with	the	result	that	I	don’t	make	the	effort	to	convince	in	a
straightforward	 fashion,	 or	 rather,	 I	 do	 make	 the	 effort,	 but	 my
incapacity	is	such	that	it	goes	entirely	unnoticed.	This	is	why	we	have
no	apparent	quarrels;	we	walk	along	peacefully	 side	by	 side,	but	all
the	 time	 tremors	keep	 running	between	us	as	 though	 someone	were
continually	 cutting	 the	 air	 between	 us	 with	 a	 sword.	 Let	 me	 not
forget:	 you	 don’t	 quarrel,	 either;	 you	 too	 suffer	 in	 silence,	 and	 on
balance	your	 suffering,	 because	of	 its	 very	 innocence,	may	be	much
harder	to	bear	than	mine.
And	 then	 of	 course	 what	 I	 had	 foreseen	 so	 clearly	 actually
happened.	 I	did	not	come	willingly,	 I	knew	what	 I	was	up	against.	 I



was	 up	 against	 the	 lure	 of	 proximity,	 that	 unreasonable	 lure	which
gets	 me	 by	 the	 throat	 and	 refuses	 to	 leave	 me	 alone	 even	 in	 this
icebox	of	a	room.	In	the	morning	you	stood	by	the	bench	with	the	two
bags	on	it,	and	in	the	afternoon	at	the	foot	of	the	steps	leading	up	to
the	coffeehouse.	It	is	almost	unbearable	to	think	about	it,	despite	the
many	and	arduous	mental	exercises	practiced	over	 the	years.	 I	don’t
know	how	I	can	do	it,	and	yet	cope	with	my	work,	but	I	shall	have	to.
I	won’t	write	a	lot,	letters	are	so	slow,	one	is	not	writing	as	freely	as
usual	 either,	nor	 shall	 I	 press	you	with	 renewed	 requests	 for	 letters;
we	have	not	achieved	much	by	way	of	letters,	we	must	try	to	achieve
it	 in	 some	 other	 way.	 It	 may	 be	 possible,	 after	 all—however
impossible	it	seems	at	present—to	arrange	to	have	the	afternoons	for
my	work;	 at	 any	 rate	 I	 am	going	 to	 try.	And	 in	 a	 certain	 sense	 this
work	 is	meant	 for	 you,	 though	 some	demon	 forced	you	 to	 suggest	 I
should	try	to	make	something	of	the	factory.	Why	do	you	have	more
understanding	for	the	factory	than	for	me!
Enough;	I	still	have	a	great	deal	to	do.	The	caretaker	is	ill,	so	now	I
shall	have	 to	make	 the	bed	 I	 flung	open	 this	morning.	 I	 should	also
sweep	and	dust,	but	since	the	caretaker	almost	 invariably	fails	 to	do
it,	there	is	no	urgent	need	for	it	to	be	done	today.	If	in	the	morning—I
don’t	 expect	 the	 caretaker	 to	wake	me—you	 felt	 like	waking	me	up
punctually	at	7:30	by	means	of	a	pleasant,	friendly	dream,	that	would
be	 very	 sweet	 of	 you.	 But	 try	 to	 arrange	 it	 in	 such	 a	way	 that	 the
dream,	before	waking	me,	continues	right	through	to	the	truly	happy
ending	which,	let	us	hope,	may	still	await	us	somewhere.

Kind	regards,	Franz

[IN	THE	MARGIN]	I	have	sent	you	the	book	by	Werfel.

February	11,	1915
I	shall	grumble,	F.,	grumble	until	I	 feel	better.	You	won’t	 laugh,	will
you?	 My	 work	 was	 going	 relatively	 well	 until	 a	 few	 days	 before
Bodenbach;	at	that	point	my	brother-in-law’s	brother	had	to	join	up,
and	then	the	factory,	that	lamentable	specimen	of	a	factory,	devolved
upon	me.	I	could	write	pages	on	the	anguish	it	has	been	causing	me
for	ages,	almost	 from	 the	beginning	 (pointless,	 for	 the	 factory	 really
doesn’t	profit	from	it).	But	now	I	really	had	to	tackle	it	and	go	there
every	day;	there	was	no	longer	any	question	of	my	being	able	to	work,



despite	the	utmost	exertion	of	will	power.	The	factory	was	practically
at	 a	 standstill;	 nevertheless,	 there	was	 the	warehouse;	 creditors	 and
clients	had	to	be	reassured,	etc.,	so	my	work—which	I	had	managed
to	get	a	good	grip	on	just	 lately—had	to	be	dropped.	But	quite	soon
things	improved,	at	least	temporarily;	my	brother-in-law’s	brother	was
stationed	in	Prague	for	the	moment,	so	he	could	spend	an	hour	or	two
at	the	factory,	which	I	took	as	an	immediate	sign	for	me	to	withdraw.
Once	more	I	sat	in	the	silent	apartment	trying	to	pick	up	the	threads.
It	is	very	difficult	for	me	to	find	my	way	back	after	an	interval;	it’s	as
though	 the	 door,	 which	 only	 a	 great	 effort	 had	 forced	 open,	 had
unobtrusively	 swung	 shut—which	 does	 indeed	 cast	 doubts	 upon	my
capabilities.	Yet	finally	I	did	succeed	in	finding	my	way	back	into	it,
and	 I	 felt	 I’d	 been	 transformed.	Why,	 for	 once,	 instead	of	my	work,
can’t	I	find	you	there?	My	good	fortune	lasted	no	more	than	two	days,
after	 which	 I	 had	 to	 move.	 We	 both	 know	 what	 it	 means	 to	 go
apartment-hunting.	 And	 once	 again,	 the	 rooms	 I’ve	 seen!	 One	 is
forced	 to	 believe	 that,	 either	 inadvertently	 or	 deliberately,	 people
bury	 themselves	 in	dirt.	At	any	rate,	 that	seems	to	be	 the	case	here;
they	imagine	dirt—by	which	I	mean	overcrowded	sideboards,	rugs	in
front	 of	 windows,	 a	 forest	 of	 photographs	 on	 much-abused	 desks,
linen	piled	high	on	beds,	aspidistras	in	corners—they	imagine	all	this
to	be	luxury.	But	I	don’t	really	mind	about	any	of	that.	All	I	want	is
peace,	 but	 the	 kind	 of	 peace	 that	 is	 beyond	people’s	 understanding.
Obviously—since	no	one	in	any	ordinary	household	needs	the	kind	of
peace	necessary	to	me;	neither	reading,	nor	studying,	nor	sleeping,	in
fact	nothing	needs	the	kind	of	peace	I	need	for	writing.	I	have	been	in
my	new	room2	since	yesterday,	and	last	night	I	was	in	such	a	state	of
despair	that	I	imagined	the	urgency	with	which	I	longed	to	get	out	of
this	room,	and	out	of	the	world,	were	equal.	And	yet	nothing	unusual
had	 happened;	 they	 are	 all	 very	 considerate,	 my	 landlady	 fades
quietly	into	the	shadows	for	my	sake;	the	young	man	who	sleeps	next
door	 comes	 home	 tired	 from	 the	 office,	 takes	 a	 few	 steps,	 and	 is	 in
bed.	And	yet	the	apartment	is	undoubtedly	small;	one	can	hear	doors
opening	and	shutting;	although	my	landlady	is	silent	all	day,	she	can’t
help	exchanging	a	few	whispered	words	with	the	other	lodger	before
going	 to	bed;	 she	can	hardly	be	heard,	 though	 the	 lodger	 can—just.
The	walls	are	 really	 terribly	 thin;	 to	my	 landlady’s	 sorrow	 I	 stopped
the	striking-clock	in	my	room,	it	was	the	first	thing	I	did	on	entering,
but	then	the	striking-clock	next	door	strikes	all	the	louder;	I	try	not	to
hear	the	minutes,	but	the	half-hours	are	proclaimed	with	a	deafening



if	melodious	sound;	but	I	cannot	play	the	tyrant	and	demand	that	this
clock	be	stopped	as	well.	It	would	be	no	good	anyway,	there	is	always
bound	to	be	a	certain	amount	of	whispering,	the	doorbell	is	bound	to
ring;	the	lodger	coughed	twice	yesterday,	by	today	it	was	more	often,
his	cough	hurts	me	more	than	it	does	him.3	 I	can’t	be	annoyed	with
any	of	them;	this	morning	my	landlady	apologized	for	the	whispering,
it	was	most	unusual	and	had	occurred	only	because	the	lodger	(for	my
sake)	was	moving	to	another	room	and	she	was	about	to	install	him	in
the	new	one;	moreover,	 she	would	hang	a	heavy	curtain	outside	 the
door.	 Extremely	 kind,	 yet	 in	 all	 probability	 I	 shall	 give	 notice	 on
Monday.	I	must	admit	I	am	very	spoiled	by	that	quiet	apartment,	but
it	 is	 the	 only	 way	 I	 can	 live.	 Don’t	 laugh,	 F.,	 don’t	 look	 upon	 my
suffering	 as	 despicable;	 no	 doubt	 many	 people	 are	 suffering
nowadays,	 and	 the	 cause	 of	 their	 suffering	 is	 something	more	 than
whispers	in	the	next	room;	at	best,	however,	they	are	fighting	for	their
existence,	or	rather	for	the	bonds	connecting	their	existence	to	that	of
the	 community,	 and	 so	 do	 I,	 and	 so	 does	 everyone.	 Accompany	me
with	your	good	wishes	when	I	look	for	another	room.
I	 will	 answer	 your	 letter	 presently.	 When	 are	 you	 going	 away
again?	The	other	day	 in	 an	 article	 there	was	 a	paragraph	about	 the
conversion	 of	 a	 gramophone	 factory	 into	 a	 canning	 factory;	 it	must
have	been	a	description	of	your	factory;	I	read	it	with	great	pleasure;
after	 all,	 I	 have	 more	 affectionate	 ties	 with	 that	 factory	 than	 with
mine.	Warm	and	good	wishes,

Franz

How	did	you	like	the	Werfel?

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	March	3,	[1915]

Today,	 F.,	 your	 letter	 arrived,	 so	 one	 letter	 has	 been	 lost,	 yours	 or
mine,	it’s	maddening.	From	now	on	I	will	send	you	a	registered	letter
regularly	once	every	 two	weeks.	 Indeed,	 there	 is	a	 lot	 to	 say,	but	 to
say	 it	 in	 open	 letters	 is	 almost	 impossible.	Moreover,	 I	 have	 almost
taken	a	dislike	to	letters;	what	good	does	it	do	if	writing	succeeds	and
everything	else	is	such	a	failure?	Possibilities	for	the	future	are	tucked
away	 in	 your	 letter,	 which	 is	 sweet	 and	 kind.	 You	 didn’t



misunderstand	 me	 in	 B[odenbach],	 but	 as	 a	 prize	 for	 me	 it
presupposes	 a	 fine	 and	 proper	 decision	which	 has	 to	 be	 carried	 out
and	not	written.

Franz

[ON	THE	VERSO]	Letter	being	sent	today.

It	 is	 very	 difficult	 to	 dispatch	 the	 manuscript4	 at	 present—before
being	typed	or	printed.

March	3,	1914	[1915]
Telegram	 and	 postcard	 have	 been	 sent.	 Weeks	 of	 not	 feeling	 like
work,	 of	 headaches,	 of	 thoughts	 perpetually	 going	 around	 in	 tight
circles,	 are	 behind	me.	 Again	 today	my	 head	 is	 aching	 like	mad	 (I
don’t	get	enough	sleep),	but	otherwise	things	have	improved,	and	are
going	to	get	better	still.	It	is	not	that	I	actually	lack	tenacity,	it	is	just
that	it	usually	works	against	me.
I	 have	 already	 left	 my	 room	 [Bilekgasse];	 it	 took	 a	 great	 deal	 of
determination.	The	old	woman	used	to	come	to	my	bed	nearly	every
morning	and	whisper	new	suggestions	 for	 improvements	with	which
to	increase	the	quiet	of	the	apartment.	With	my	notice	to	quit	firmly
resolved,	 I	 still	had	 to	express	my	gratitude.	Finally,	on	 the	 last	day
but	one,	when	I	opened	my	mouth	to	give	notice,	she	was	just	taking
her	 daughter’s	 theater	 coat	 out	 of	 the	 cupboard	 (there	 are	 certain
yellowish	theater	coats	with	lace	collars	that	throw	me	into	a	state	of
melancholy,	and	it	was	one	of	those	coats);	since	she	intended	to	take
her	daughter	to	a	small	party	that	evening,	I	didn’t	want	to	spoil	her
pleasure,	 so	 postponed	 giving	 notice	 until	 the	 following	 day.
However,	 it	 wasn’t	 quite	 as	 bad	 as	 I	 had	 expected,	 though	 she	 did
confess	 she	 had	 thought	 I	 would	 stay	 there	 until	 the	 day	 I	 died—
without	 being	 more	 specific	 about	 the	 date.	 The	 room	 I	 have	 now
rented	may	not	be	much	better,	but	at	least	it’s	not	the	same	room.5
Perhaps	 it	 was	 not	 so	 much	 the	 restlessness	 of	 the	 apartment	 that
drove	 me	 away,	 for	 after	 all	 I	 have	 achieved	 practically	 nothing
recently	so	far	as	my	work	is	concerned,	so	haven’t	been	in	a	position
to	 test	 either	 the	 calm	 or	 the	 restlessness	 of	 the	 apartment;	 it	 was
more	my	own	restlessness,	a	feeling	I	have	no	wish	to	interpret.
However,	 I	 do	 want	 to	 interpret	 your	 dream.	 Had	 you	 not	 been
lying	on	the	ground	among	the	animals,	you	would	have	been	unable



to	see	the	sky	and	the	stars	and	wouldn’t	have	been	set	free.	Perhaps
you	wouldn’t	have	survived	the	terror	of	standing	upright.	I	feel	much
the	same;	it	is	a	mutual	dream	that	you	have	dreamed	for	us	both.
In	your	letter	you	say	jokingly	that	I	should	come	to	Berlin	and	ask
seriously	what	 is	 to	happen	 to	us.	The	 two	are	 interrelated.	Tell	me
candidly,	do	you	think	there	is	a	future	for	us	together	in	Prague?	If
not,	 it	 won’t	 be	 Prague’s	 fault.	 Nor	 will	 it	 be	 the	 fault	 of	 outward
circumstances.	 On	 the	 contrary.	 Once	 the	 war	 has	 come	 to	 an	 end
without	causing	too	much	destruction,	presumably	conditions	will	be
quite	 favorable.	 Just	 think,	 I	 have	 now	 been	 given	 an	 extra	 1200
kronen,	a	nice	sum	of	money	as	 such,	but	 I	cannot	get	any	pleasure
from	it	here;	on	the	contrary,	I	almost	felt	like	refusing	it,	as	if	it	were
an	additional	obstacle.	What	do	you	think?
A	 few	more	questions:	Why	do	you	sleep	badly,	and	what	kind	of
badness	 is	 it?	How	did	 you	 get	 hold	 of	 that	 envelope?	Why	do	 you
read	old	and	not	very	good	books	 such	as	Meditation?	A	 suggestion:
Will	you	read,	but	 to	 the	end,	only	books	 that	 I	 send	you?	 In	which
case	 you	 would	 have	 to	 start	 with	 the	 volumes	 of	 Flaubert’s	 and
Browning’s	letters.	And	then	in	the	summer	we	will	travel.

Franz

[POSTMARKED	ON	ARRIVAL:	Berlin,	March	23,	1915]
[March	21,	1915]

Still	no	news,	F.;	and	it’s	such	a	long	time.	How	are	you	spending	this
first	day	of	spring?	I	went	for	a	walk	today,	my	first	for	ages,	for	it	is
Sunday	 and	 the	 weather	 is	 fine,	 one	 of	 those	 moments	 when	 the
dispositions	in	the	courtroom	change,	when	the	most	absurd	switches
take	place,	when	one	imagines	one	has	been	treated	very	well,	and	all
sums,	 despite	 obvious	 and	 eye-catching	 errors,	 come	 out	 right.	 This
feeling,	however,	is	a	misplaced	one,	at	least	it	comes	in	unnecessary
abundance;	 on	 this	 particular	morning	 I	 don’t	 need	 it,	 though	 I	 did
need	it	yesterday	morning	and	the	one	before,	when	I	virtually	rolled
my	aching	head	in	my	hands	because	it	seemed	impossible	to	abandon
it	to	its	own	devices.	This	morning	might	make	up	for	it,	but	I	didn’t
know	this	yesterday,	and	by	tomorrow	I	shall	have	forgotten.
Have	 you	 moved	 yet?	 I	 have	 moved	 to	 a	 room	 about	 ten	 times
noisier	 than	the	 last,	but	 incomparably	more	pleasant	 in	every	other
respect.	 I	 thought	 both	 the	 location	 and	 the	 appearance	 of	 a	 room



were	irrelevant	to	me.	But	they	are	not.	Without	having	a	fairly	open
view,	without	 the	 chance	 of	 seeing	 a	 large	 expanse	 of	 sky	 from	my
window	with	perhaps	a	steeple	in	the	distance—that	is,	 if	 it	can’t	be
real	 open	 country—without	 these,	 I	 am	 a	 wretched,	 depressed
creature;	though	I	cannot	give	the	exact	proportion	of	misery	that	can
be	attributed	to	the	room,	it	cannot	be	small;	in	this	room	I	even	get
the	morning	sun,	and	since	the	rooftops	all	around	are	much	lower,	it
shines	full	and	direct	upon	me.	But	I	get	more	than	the	morning	sun,
for	 it	 is	 a	 corner	 room	 and	 two	 windows	 face	 southwest.	 But	 to
prevent	me	 from	 becoming	 presumptuous,	 someone	 right	 above	my
head	 in	 a	 studio	 (empty,	 not	 even	 let!!)	 stamps	 around	 all	 day	 in
heavy	 boots	 and	 has	 installed	 some	 kind	 of	 quite	 pointless	 noise-
machine	to	simulate	the	sound	of	a	game	of	nine-pins.	A	heavy	ball	is
rolled	 at	 great	 speed	 along	 the	 full	 length	 of	 the	 ceiling,	 lands	 in	 a
corner,	and	comes	slowly	bumping	back.	Although	the	lady	who	lets
the	room	can	hear	it	too,	she	tries—since	nothing	must	be	left	untried
for	 a	 lodger—to	 use	 logic	 to	 deny	 the	 existence	 of	 the	 noise	 by
pointing	out	that	the	studio	is	untenanted	and	empty.	To	which	I	can
only	 reply	 that	 this	 noise	 is	 not	 the	 only	 illogical,	 and	 therefore
irremediable,	vexation	in	the	world.
By	the	way,	I	am	by	no	means	in	the	country;	in	fact,	when	out	on
my	balcony	I	look	almost	straight	into	the	windows	of	the	apartment
whose	 plans	 you	 and	 I	 once	 studied.	 Today	 that	 apartment	 too	was
getting	the	morning	sun	through	all	three	windows	on	the	street	side.
I	had	no	 idea	what	 to	 say	 to	 those	windows.	What	would	you	have
said?	I	see	these	windows	in	the	evening	as	well,	usually	all	three	of
them	are	lit	up,	though	not	as	late	as	mine.	I	live	entirely	alone,	spend
every	evening	at	home,	haven’t	attended	the	Saturday	evenings6	for	a
month,	 but	 have	 been	 incapable	 of	 doing	 any	 decent	 work	 for	 2
months.	But	I’ve	talked	enough	about	myself.	Now	it’s	your	turn!

Affectionately,	F.

[POSTMARK:	Prague,	April	5,	1915]
Also	on	Sunday,	Felice,	on	a	lovely,	peaceful,	gray	Sunday.	The	canary
and	 I	are	 the	only	ones	awake	 in	 the	apartment.	 I	am	at	home	with
my	parents.	 In	my	own	 room,	 I	 suppose,	 all	hell	has	been	 let	 loose;
behind	 the	wall	on	 the	right	 it	 sounds	as	 though	they	are	unloading
timber;	one	can	hear	a	tree	trunk	being	released	from	the	truck,	then
it	 is	 raised,	 sighs	 like	 a	 living	 thing,	 then	 a	 crash!	 It	 falls	 and	 is



received	 into	 the	 reverberations	 of	 the	 whole	 infernal	 concrete
building.	Above	my	 room	 the	 elevator	mechanism	purrs	 and	 echoes
right	 through	 the	 empty	 attic	 rooms.	 (This	 is	 my	 supposed	 former
studio-ghost,	 but	 there	 are	 also	 housemaids	 who,	 when	 drying	 the
wash,	practically	run	their	slippers	over	my	scalp.)	Below	me	there	is
a	 nursery-cum-drawingroom;	 during	 the	 day	 children	 run	 about,
screaming;	 somewhere	 a	 door	 is	 continually	 screeching	 as	 it	 is
wrenched	open;	the	nursemaid	for	her	part	screams	in	an	attempt	to
enforce	peace	and	quiet;	in	the	evening	the	grownups	chatter	away	as
though	 they	were	 having	 a	 party	 down	 there	 every	 day.	 But	 by	 10
o’clock	 it’s	 all	 over,	 at	 least	 it	 has	 been	 so	 far;	 sometimes	 there	has
been	peace	even	at	9	and	then,	provided	they	are	still	capable	of	 it,
my	nerves	can	enjoy	a	most	wonderful	calm.
For	 relief	 from	 daytime	 noises	 I	 have	 sent	 to	 Berlin—I	 am
constantly	 forced	 to	 fall	back	on	Berlin—for	some	Oropax,	a	kind	of
wax	 wrapped	 in	 cotton	 wool.	 It	 may	 be	 a	 bit	 messy,	 and	 it’s	 a
nuisance	 to	 start	 stopping	 up	 one’s	 ears	 in	 one’s	 lifetime;	 it	 doesn’t
even	 shut	 out	 the	 noise,	 merely	 muffles	 it—but	 even	 so.	 In
Strindberg’s	novel	By	the	Open	Sea,	which	I	read	a	few	days	ago—it’s
magnificent,	 do	 you	know	 it?—the	hero,	 suffering	 from	a	 complaint
not	 unlike	 mine,	 had	 some	 so-called	 sleeping-balls	 which	 he	 had
bought	in	Germany,	little	steel	balls	that	slide	into	one’s	ears.	But	alas,
they	seem	to	exist	only	in	Strindberg’s	imagination.
Am	I	suffering	on	account	of	the	war?	Essentially	one	cannot	know
as	yet	what	one	experiences	within	oneself.	Superficially	it	makes	me
suffer	because	our	factory	is	going	on	the	rocks,	something	I	suspect
rather	than	know,	since	I	haven’t	been	there	for	a	month.	My	brother-
in-law’s	 brother	 is	 doing	 his	 training	 here,	 and	 so	 is	 able	 to	 give	 it
some	attention	for	the	time	being.	My	eldest	sister’s	husband	is	in	the
Carpathians	 with	 the	 Army	 Service	 Corps,	 and	 presumably	 not	 in
imminent	 danger;	 my	 other	 sister’s	 husband,	 as	 you	 know,	 was
wounded,	 then	 went	 to	 the	 front	 for	 a	 few	 days,	 came	 back	 with
sciatica,	and	is	now	being	restored	to	health	in	Teplitz.7	In	addition,	I
mostly	 suffer	 from	 the	war	because	 I	myself	 am	 taking	no	part.	But
put	down	like	that	in	black	and	white,	it	merely	looks	silly.	Anyway,
it’s	not	out	of	the	question	that	my	turn	won’t	come.	There	are	certain
decisive	 factors	 that	 prevent	 me	 from	 volunteering,	 though	 among
them	are	those	that	always	prevent	me	anyhow.
Including	those,	F.,	that	prevent	us	from	living	in	Prague	no	matter
how	good	the	conditions,	and	no	matter	how	desirable	they	will	seem



in	retrospect	a	few	years	hence.	I	am	out	of	place	here,	and	it	is	not
that	 I	 am	 in	 conflict	with	my	 surroundings	 (if	 I	were,	no	one’s	help
would	 be	 more	 welcome	 or	 more	 opportune	 than	 yours);	 I	 am	 in
conflict	only	with	myself,	and	for	both	our	sakes	I	must	on	no	account
drag	you	with	me	into	this	conflict;	when	in	my	folly	I	tried	to	do	so,
it	brought	about	 its	own	 retribution	almost	 at	once.	 In	order	 to	 feel
one	has,	or	actually	has,	the	right	to	another	human	being,	one	must
either	have	progressed	 further	 than	 I	have,	or	else	not	even	attempt
the	course	I	wish	to	follow.	But	here	in	Prague	it	seems	impossible	for
me	to	escape	from	this	predicament.
You	 seem	 to	have	misunderstood	my	 remark	about	money.	 It	 is	 a
monthly	 raise	 in	 salary	 of	 100	 kronen—the	 spending	 of	 which,
needless	 to	 say,	 doesn’t	 worry	 me	 in	 the	 least.	 Don’t	 forget,	 I	 am
actually	liable	for	the	factory	with	all	I	possess!	My	dissatisfaction	was
due	to	the	fact	that	owing	to	this	money	the	hole	I	find	myself	in	has
been	dug	a	little	deeper.
You	 tell	me	 so	 little	 about	 yourself,	 F.	What	work	 you	 are	 doing,
whether	there	is	less	work	now	than	there	used	to	be,	what	the	new
job	 implies,	 whom	 you	 see,	 why	 you	 sit	 at	 home	 by	 yourself	 on
Sunday	 afternoon,	 what	 you	 are	 reading,	 whether	 you	 go	 to	 the
theater,	 whether	 your	 salary	 hasn’t	 been	 reduced,	 what	 you	 are
wearing	(in	Bodenbach	it	was	very	pretty,	that	little	jacket),	how	you
are	getting	along	with	Erna—I	am	told	nothing	about	all	this,	though
it	surely	lies	well	within	my	sphere	of	interest.	And	your	brother?	And
your	brother-in-law?
One	 more	 thing:	 We	 need	 have	 no	 regrets	 about	 the	 loss	 of	 the
apartment	opposite	my	room.	An	apartment	with	no	view	(my	room,
on	the	other	hand,	has	a	distant	view	in	two	directions,	though	indeed
this	is	hard	to	understand	without	further	explanation),	inhabited	by	a
woman	and	her	daughter,	of	whom	I	recall	nothing	but	a	poisonously
yellow	blouse,	hairy	 cheeks,	 and	a	waddling	gait.	That	apartment	 is
well	lost.

Affectionately,	Franz

[POSTMARK:	April	20,	1915]
What	a	long	time	I	have	been	without	news,	Felice!	What	are	you	up
to?	 If	 someone	doesn’t	 reply	 for	 a	 long	 time,	 it’s	 as	 though	he	were
sitting	opposite	one	 in	 silence;	 one	 is	 tempted	 to	ask:	What	 are	you
thinking	about?



Now’s	the	time	to	think	about	the	past	year,	though	it	is	always	the
time	to	think	about	that.	She	looked	marvelous	as	she	entered	in	the
blue	dress,	 but	 the	 kiss	was	not	 sincere,	 neither	 sincerely	 bestowed,
nor	sincerely	received.	Not	sincerely	bestowed,	since	he	had	no	right
to	it;	the	fact	that	he	loved	her	did	not	in	itself	give	him	the	right;	the
fact	that	he	loved	her	should	have	denied	him	that	kiss.	For	where	did
he	 intend	 to	 take	 her?	 What	 was	 his	 own	 position?	 Owing	 to	 the
combined	effort	by	his	parents	(for	which	he	almost	hated	them,	quite
unjustly	of	course)	and	a	number	of	others,	a	plank	had	been	placed
under	him,	upon	which	he	stands	to	this	day.	And	because	this	plank
was	 strong	enough	 to	 carry	 two—owing	 to	 this	 sadly	 ridiculous	 fact
he	assumed	the	right	to	take	her	with	him.	But	in	reality	there	was	no
firm	 ground	 under	 his	 feet;	 that	 he	 had	managed	 to	 balance	 on	 his
plank	 until	 now	was	 no	merit,	 but	 a	 disgrace.	 So	 tell	me	where	 he
intended	to	carry	her	off	to;	it	is	unimaginable.	He	loved	her	and	was
insatiable.	 Today	 he	 loves	 her	 no	 less,	 though	 finally	 he	may	 have
learned	his	 lesson:	 that	 it	 isn’t	 as	 simple	and	easy	as	all	 that	 to	win
her,	 even	 if	 she	 agrees.	 But	 what	 I	 don’t	 understand	 is	 how	 an
intelligent	 girl	 who	 sees	 things	 clearly,	 who	 has	 learned	 her	 lesson
from	endless	torture—I	don’t	understand	how	she	can	still	believe	that
here	 in	 Prague	 it	 would	 be	 possible	 and	 right.	 She	 did	 come	 here,
after	all;	she	did	see,	 if	not	everything,	at	 least	a	great	deal;	she	has
had	 the	 opportunity	 of	 reading	 so	 much	 about	 it,	 and	 yet	 she	 still
believes	 it	 would	 be	 possible.	 How	 does	 she	 imagine	 it	 would	 be?
After	all,	she	did	at	least	sense	the	truth,	and	not	just	once,	but	several
times;	 her	 childishly	 malicious	 words	 at	 the	 Askanische	 Hof	 were
proof	enough.—To	change	the	subject:

Could	we	see	each	other	at	Whitsun?	It	would	make	me	very	happy.
Who	 knows	 whether	 my	 plans	 for	 a	 summer	 trip,	 which	 you
apparently	 don’t	 even	want	 to	 hear	 of,	won’t	 be	 impossible	 anyway
owing	to	 the	cancellation	of	all	vacations?	But	 I	don’t	want	 to	go	to
Berlin	for	Whitsun.	To	go	to	Germany	at	all	creates	awful	difficulties.
You	know	how	long	I	kept	begging	for	my	passport,	and	in	the	end	it
didn’t	arrive	in	time.	After	that	I	didn’t	bother	to	go	back.	The	papers
I	enclosed	are	still	there,	and	some	rat	or	other	is	now	gnawing	your
two	 telegrams	 which	 belong	 to	 me.	 The	 same	 old	 game	 would	 be
bound	to	start	all	over	again.	A	letter	from	you,	some	proof	of	urgent
family	business	would	be	required,	and	then	again	that	long	wait.	You
have	a	passport.	If	you	were	willing	to	come	to	Bodenbach,	we	could



spend	Whitsun	in	Bohemian	Switzerland.	Of	course	it	would	be	best	if
you	could	come	alone.	If	that’s	impossible,	bring	anyone	you	like.	And
write	to	me	about	it	soon.

Affectionately,	Franz

Two	 books	 are	 on	 their	 way	 to	 you;	 in	 fact	 they	 should	 have
arrived	long	ago.

[PICTURE	POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Sátoraljaujhely,	April	24,	1915]8

Best	wishes.	 Even	 if	 only	 some	 of	 the	 postcards	 reach	 you,	 they	 all
have	 the	 same	 meaning.	 While	 traveling	 I	 am	 accompanied	 by	 the
hallucination	of	a	dangling	hand	which	I	raise	and	kiss.

Franz

[PICTURE	POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Hatvan,	April	25,	1915]

Accompanying	my	sister	to	my	brother-in-law.	Best	wishes	and	a	plea
for	 the	 ending	of	 the	 long	 silence.	 I	 am	unwavering	 about	Whitsun.
Would	 even	 come	 to	 Germany	 if	 you	 want	 me	 to,	 but	 this	 would
require	a	letter	from	you.

Franz

[PICTURE	POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Nagymihály,	April	26,	1915]
Greetings	at	every	step.

Franz

[PICTURE	POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Budapest,	April	27,	1915]
Handed	over	my	sister	and	returned,	alas.	Best	wishes

F.

[PICTURE	POSTCARD]
[Vienna,	end	of	April	1915]



Last	stop.	Best	wishes.
F.

[PICTURE	POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Všenory-Dobřichovice,	May	3,	1915]
My	 reply	 to	 the	question:	Yes,	 yes,	 yes.	But	you	 should	not	ask	and
should	 know	 whom	 you	 are	 asking	 and	 who	 is	 answering.	 And
Whitsun?	Letters	take	so	long,	your	letter	from	Freienwalde,	after	an
immense	delay,	arrived	shortly	after	my	departure;	your	second	letter
arrived	 fairly	 punctually,	 the	 book	 came	 yesterday;	 I	 spent	 half	 the
afternoon	 gratefully	 poring	 over	 it.9	 Today	 I	 have	 been	 out	 in	 the
country	since	early	morning,	alone	except	for	a	biography	of	Bismarck
which	 I	 have	 hardly	 bothered	 to	 open.	 Almost	 the	 only	 thing	 that
gives	me	a	relative	sense	of	contentment	in	Prague	is	being	alone.

Affectionately,	Franz

[POSTMARKED	ON	ARRIVAL:	Berlin,	May	6,	1915]
Don’t	 write	 like	 that,	 Felice.	 You	 are	 wrong.	 There	 are	 certain
misunderstandings	between	us	which	I,	at	any	rate,	confidently	expect
to	 be	 cleared	 up,	 though	 not	 perhaps	 by	 letter.	 I	 have	 not	 changed
(alas);	 the	 balance—of	 which	 I	 represent	 the	 vacillations—has
remained	the	same;	the	only	slight	change	has	been	in	the	distribution
of	weight;	 I	believe	 I	know	more	about	both	of	us,	 and	now	have	a
temporary	objective.	We	will	discuss	 it	at	Whitsun,	 if	we	manage	 to
meet.	 Felice,	 don’t	 think	 that	 the	 impeding	 considerations	 and
anxieties	are	not	an	almost	unbearable	and	detestable	burden	to	me,
that	 I	 wouldn’t	 prefer	 to	 shed	 everything,	 that	 I	 wouldn’t	 prefer	 a
straightforward	 approach,	 and	 that	 I	wouldn’t	 rather	 be	 happy	 now
and	at	once	 in	a	small	 intimate	circle,	and	above	all	give	happiness.
But	this	isn’t	possible,	it	is	a	burden	I	am	forced	to	bear,	I	shiver	with
discontent,	and	even	if	my	failures	stared	me	in	the	face,	and	not	only
my	failures	but	also	the	loss	of	all	hope	and	the	steady	approach	of	all
guilt—I	really	couldn’t	behave	otherwise.	Incidentally,	Felice,	why	do
you	 think—at	 least	 it	 seems	 as	 though	 you	 do	 at	 times—that	 life
together	here	in	Prague	might	be	possible?	After	all,	you	used	to	have
grave	doubts	about	 it.	What	has	 removed	 them?	This	 is	 something	 I
still	don’t	know.



And	 now	 again	 those	 lines	 in	 the	 book.10	 Reading	 them	makes	 me
unhappy.	Nothing	has	ended,	there	is	no	darkness,	no	cold.	But	I	am
almost	afraid	to	write	it	down,	it	seems	like	a	confirmation	of	the	fact
that	 such	 things	 really	 could	 be	 written.	 What	 dreadful
misunderstandings	are	piling	up	again.
Listen,	 Felice,	 the	 only	 thing	 that	 has	happened	 is	 that	my	 letters
have	become	less	frequent	and	different.	What	was	the	result	of	those
more	 frequent	 and	 different	 letters?	 You	 know	 it.	 We	 must	 start
afresh.	That	We,	however,	does	not	refer	to	you,	for	you	were	and	are
in	 the	 right,11	 insofar	 as	 you	 alone	 were	 concerned;	 that	We	 refers
rather	to	me	and	to	our	relationship.	But	for	such	a	fresh	start	letters
are	no	good;	and	if	they	are	necessary—and	they	are	necessary—then
they	must	be	different.	But	fundamentally,	Felice,	fundamentally.—Do
you	remember	the	letters	I	wrote	to	Frankfurt	about	two	years	ago,	at
just	about	 this	 time	of	year?	Believe	me,	deep	down	I	am	almost	on
the	point	of	writing	them	again	right	now.	They	are	lying	in	wait	on
the	tip	of	my	pen.	But	they	will	not	be	written.

Why	 don’t	 you	 realize	 that	 it	 would	 be	 my	 good	 fortune	 (and	 our
good	 fortune,	 perhaps	 not	 our	 sorrow,	 but	 at	 any	 rate	 our	 good
fortune	must	be	shared,	in	spite	of	Salammbô	of	which,	by	the	way,	I
have	always	been	suspicious;	you	couldn’t	possibly	have	written	that
in	Education),	that	it	would	be	my	good	fortune	to	become	a	soldier,
provided	of	course	my	health	will	stand	up	to	it,	which	I	hope	it	will.	I
shall	be	called	up	at	the	end	of	this	month,	or	the	beginning	of	next.
You	ought	to	hope	that	I	will	be	accepted,	as	is	my	wish.
And	at	Whitsun	we	shall	meet.	Pity	 I	haven’t	heard	 from	you	yet.
Should	 you	 have	 the	 slightest	 objection	 to	 coming	 to	 Bodenbach,	 I
will	 try	 to	 get	 a	 passport	 and	 pay	 you	 a	 visit—if	 necessary	 even	 in
Berlin.
The	Memoirs12	are	meant	neither	to	improve	nor	influence	your	way
of	 thinking;	 that	was	 not	my	 intention.	 But	 this	 life	 really	 is	 worth
sharing.	How	it	longs	to	sacrifice	itself,	and	does!	A	veritable	suicide
and	a	resurrection	while	still	alive.	And	what	is	the	sacrifice	for?	How
many	readers	would	be	able	to	recognize	a	success	that,	taken	out	of
the	context	of	 the	book,	could	stand	on	 its	own	 legs?	 I	am	glad	you
are	 reading	 it.	 I	hope	Muzzi	doesn’t	bother	you	 too	much	when	 she
turns	on	the	tap	next	to	the	table.	Kind	regards	to	you	and	to	her.

Franz



[POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Prague,	May	4,	1915]

Letters	 are	 too	 slow,	 one	 is	 on	 its	 way,	 I	 am	 writing	 this	 postcard
because	 I’m	worried	 about	 you;	 accept	 it	 as	 a	mere	 handshake,	 the
rest	is	in	the	letter.	Today	I	heard	that	you	were	in	Budapest	on	April
24th,	so	we	were	probably	there	at	the	same	time;	what	a	happy	but
clumsy	coincidence!	I	was	there	for	only	two	hours	in	the	evening	on
my	way	back,	but	could	easily	have	stayed	until	noon	 the	 following
day.	How	maddening!	The	greatest	comfort	I	derived	from	my	stay	in
Budapest	was	 that	 I	 thought	about	you,	 that	you	had	been	 there	 (in
days	 only	 seemingly	 better	 for	 us),	 that	 one	 of	 your	 sisters	 is	 there,
and	 so	 on	 and	 so	 forth.	 The	 combination	 produced	 a	 sense	 of
proximity,	but	to	think	that	you	were	actually	there,	might	suddenly
have	stood	there	at	my	table	in	the	coffeehouse!	Maddening!

[PICTURE	POSTCARD]
[Všenory-Dobřichovice,]	Sunday,	May	9,	[1915]

At	 least	3	weeks	without	news,	without	an	answer	to	my	letters	and
numerous	postcards.	Am	rather	anxious.	In	apparent	contradiction	to
this,	 am	 sitting	 on	 a	 lofty	 garden	 terrace	 looking	 out	 over	 a	 wide
valley,	 fields,	 meadows,	 a	 river,	 and	 wooded	 hillsides.	 Cool,	 sunny
day.	Where	are	you?	Wherever	you	may	be,

my	most	affectionate	regards
[POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Prague,	May	26,	1915]
Dear	 Felice,	 the	 other	 day	 you	 asked	 me	 a	 number	 of	 fantastic
questions	about	F.’s	fiancé.	I	am	better	able	to	answer	them	now,	for	I
observed	 him	 carefully	 on	 the	 return	 journey	 in	 the	 train.13	 It	 was
made	easy,	for	the	crowd	was	such	that	the	two	of	us	literally	had	to
sit	in	one	seat.	Well,	in	my	opinion	he	is	really	in	bondage	to	F.;	you
should	 have	 seen	 how,	 throughout	 the	 long	 journey,	 he	 sought
memories	of	F.	and	her	room	among	the	lilac	(this	is	the	first	time	he
has	ever	traveled	with	anything	of	the	kind).	Old	Herr	W.14	sat	on	his
other	side,	reciting	poems	by	Heine.	However	fond	his	neighbor	may
be	of	Herr	W.,	he	does	not	care	 for	Heine’s	poetry.	There	 is	but	one
short	 line	 he	 likes,	 which	 may	 not	 even	 be	 by	 Heine.	 I	 believe	 it
appears	several	 times	as	a	motto	 in	Heine’s	works:	“She	was	 lovable
and	he	 loved	her,	but	he	was	not	 lovable	and	she	did	not	 love	him.



(Old	Play.)”15	But	I	didn’t	mean	to	write	about	Heine,	rather	to	give
you	various	pieces	of	 information	you	seem	to	want.	Soon.	 I	believe
the	person	concerned	has	greater	confidence	in	me	than	in	F.

[IN	THE	MARGIN]	A	kiss	upon	the	wide	soft	hand	in	its	delicate	glove.

[POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Prague,	May	27,	1915]

Dear	Felice,	listen,	he	says	he	is	alarmed.	He	says	he	stayed	there	too
long.	 Two	 days	 had	 been	 too	much.	 After	 one	 day	 it	 is	 easy	 to	 get
away,	 but	 two	days	 create	 ties	which	 are	 painful	 to	 break.	 Sleeping
under	the	same	roof,	eating	at	the	same	table,	experiencing	the	same
daily	routine	twice	over—this	might	almost	be	said	to	constitute	a	rite
following	 some	 unwritten	 law.	 At	 least	 this	 is	 how	 he	 feels;	 he	 is
alarmed;	 he	 longs	 for	 the	 blueberry	 snapshot,	 wants	 information
about	her	toothache,	and	is	very	impatient	for	news.	By	which	I	don’t
mean	 to	 say	 he	 is	 unhappy	 at	 this	 moment;	 at	 present	 he	 looks
forward	to	the	possibility	that	he	may	yet	be	accepted.16	But	if	he	isn’t
accepted,	 which	 would	 be	 very	 bad,	 then	 he	 would	 like,	 in
contradiction	to	the	above,	to	embark	as	soon	as	possible	on	that	joint
expedition	to	the	Baltic.

F.

[POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Prague,	July	10,	1915]

Dear	Felice,	I	suspected	something	serious	might	happen,	but	nothing
as	 bad	 as	 this.	 There	 is	 no	 living	 trace	 on	 the	 film;	 we	 took	 the
photographs	with	the	protective	cover	 instead	of	 the	 film.	 I	pass	 the
films	to	your	room,	you	throw	them	back	to	mine—all	in	vain;	at	the
sight	 of	 your	 camera	 the	 Jews	 take	 to	 their	 heels;	 at	 Elbogen	 [near
Karlsbad17]	I	glance	up	at	you,	thinking	it	will	be	forever;	all	in	vain
and	in	vain.	You	are	all	right,	you	have	the	camera,	and	yourself,	but
how	are	you	going	to	console	me?

Franz

[POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Rumburg,	July	20,	1915]18



Dear	Felice,	you	will	be	hearing	from	me	more	often	now,	forgive	my
silence.	On	my	return	 to	Prague	 things	became	unbearable,	 I	had	 to
get	away,	I	felt	an	urge	to	get	away,	and	since	I	was	also	being	driven
away	by	insomnia	and	all	that	goes	with	it,	I	gave	in.	I	wanted	to	go
either	 far	 away,	 to	 Lake	Wolfgang,	 for	 example,	 or—from	 that	 old,
though	 constantly	 diminishing,	 habit	 of	 mine—to	 a	 sanatorium.
Finally	the	bad	train	service	(17	hours	to	Wolfgang)	scared	me	off	the
long	journey,	so	I	am	in	a	sanatorium.	Disgraceful	but	consistent,	fits
my	general	life	as	a	lid	fits	a	saucepan.	As	a	matter	of	fact	I	probably
won’t	stay	long.	In	the	autumn	I	shall	have	at	least	one	free	week.	My
principal	disease	is	impatience	or	patience,	I	am	not	quite	sure	which.

Affectionately,	yours,	Franz

[PICTURE	POSTCARD]
[Rumburg,	end	of	July	1915]

Somewhat	acclimatized	by	now.	Huge	beautiful	woods.	A	simple	hilly,
yet	 not	mountainous	 country,	 so	 just	 right	 for	my	 present	 frame	 of
mind.	 On	 Sunday	 I	 am	 going	 home.	 A	 parcel	 from	 home	 arrived
today;	 looking	 forward	 to	 the	 possibility	 of	 finding	 something	 from
you	inside.

Affectionately,	Franz

August	9,	1915
Dear	 Felice,	 I	 spoke	 to	 him	 quite	 frankly,	 as	 you	would	 have	 done,
and	he	also	answered	me	frankly.
I	said:	“Why	don’t	you	write?	Why	are	you	tormenting	F.?	That	you
are	 tormenting	 her	 is	 surely	 quite	 obvious,	 from	her	 postcards.	 You
promise	to	write,	and	don’t.	You	send	a	telegram	‘letter	on	way,’	but
there	is	no	letter	on	the	way;	it	doesn’t	get	written	until	2	days	later.
Once	 in	 a	 while	 and	 as	 an	 exception,	 a	 girl	 might	 be	 permitted	 to
behave	 in	 this	 way,	 it	 could	 even	 be	 innocent,	 provided	 it	 is	 in
keeping	with	 her	 character.	 But	 in	 your	 case	 it	 is	 not	 innocent,	 for
your	silence	can	only	mean	concealment,	so	cannot	be	excused.”
He	 replied:	 “But	 it	 can	be	 excused,	 for	 there	 are	 circumstances	 in
which	there	is	little	difference	between	expressing	and	concealing.	My
suffering	is	fourfold:
I	cannot	live	in	Prague.	I	don’t	know	if	I	can	live	elsewhere,	but	that



I	cannot	live	here	is	the	most	definite	thing	I	know.
Furthermore:	This	is	why	I	cannot	have	F.	at	present.
Furthermore:	 I	 cannot	 help	 (it	 is	 even	 in	 print19)	 admiring	 other
people’s	children.
Finally:	At	times	I	feel	I	shall	be	crushed	by	these	torments	on	every
side.	But	my	present	suffering	is	not	the	worst.	The	worst	is	that	time
passes,	 that	 this	 suffering	 makes	 me	 more	 wretched	 and	 incapable,
and	prospects	for	the	future	grow	increasingly	more	dismal.
Is	that	not	enough?	She	cannot	imagine	what	I	have	been	through
since	my	penultimate	meeting	with	F.	For	weeks	on	end	I	dread	being
alone	 in	 my	 room.	 For	 weeks	 on	 end	 sleep	 and	 delirium	 are
indistinguishable.	 I	 go	 to	 a	 sanatorium,	 yet	 am	 convinced	 of	 the
madness	 of	 doing	 so.	What	 do	 I	 expect	 to	 gain?	 Is	 it	 a	 place	where
nights	 don’t	 exist?	 It’s	 worse:	 days	 there	 are	 the	 same	 as	 nights.	 I
come	back	and	spend	the	first	week	as	though	beside	myself,	think	of
nothing	but	my,	 or	 our,	misfortune,	 and	neither	 at	 the	office	nor	 in
ordinary	 conversation	 am	 I	 able	 to	 take	 in	 more	 than	 mere
superficialities,	 and	 this	 only	 between	 the	 aches	 and	 strains	 in	 my
head.	I	am	in	the	grip	of	a	kind	of	imbecility.	Wasn’t	I	rather	like	this
in	Karlsbad?	Which	reminds	me	of	that	last	night	in	Bodenbach,	when
I	pulled	the	blanket	over	me	at	4	o’clock	and	thought:	now	F.	is	here
—she	is	mine—for	2	whole	days—what	bliss!	And	then	came	Karlsbad
and—I	have	to	say	even	this—the	truly	horrible	journey	to	Aussig.
Well,	 even	 now	 I	 haven’t	 said	much,	 but	 something.	 This	much	 I
might	 write	 and	 tell	 F.	 Basically,	 briefly,	 her	 reply	 would	 be:	 ‘You
have	 only	 yourself	 to	 blame.’	 To	 provoke	 this	 reply	 would	 be
pointless,	 so	 I	 won’t	 write.	 Had	 anything	 new	 happened	 to	 me,	 I
would	 of	 course	 have	 written	 at	 once,	 but	 this	 old	 stuff—though
increased	to	immense	proportions	in	the	past	few	months—she	knows
it	 all,	 or	 rather,	 has	 heard	 of	 it.	 I	 really	 can’t	 think	 of	 a	 remedy.	A
meeting	 perhaps,	 next	 Sunday	 in	 Bodenbach?	 It	 wouldn’t	 be	 a
remedy.
It	is	very	odd.	F.’s	writing	is	quite	unlike	her	talk.	If	she	were	to	talk
the	way	she	writes,	all	would	be	different;	I	am	not	saying	it	would	be
better,	but	all	would	be	different.	She	says	I	take	everything	literally.
Possibly.	But	so	does	she,	even	more	so.	For	instance,	had	I	said	to	her
face	 what	 I	 have	 just	 said	 here,	 F.	 would	 probably	 have	 replied:
‘That’s	so	like	you.	A	meeting	in	Bodenbach,	according	to	you,	 is	no
remedy.	And	you	say	it	would	not	be	better	if	I	spoke	the	way	I	write.’
Unperturbed	by	 this,	 I	maintain:	 ‘Had	 I	been	 in	a	 state	of	mind	last



year	 like	 the	 one	 I	 am	 in	 now	 (it	 was	 different,	 though	 no	 less
intolerable),	 then	 F.	 would	 undoubtedly	 be	 in	 Prague	 today;	 my
second	 suffering	 would	 have	 been	 removed,	 and	 possibly	 the	 third
too,	but	the	first	and	one-half	of	the	fourth	would	have	grown	to	such
proportions	that	it	would	have	buried	us	all.’	”
These	are	his	words,	and	his	appearance	confirms	his	state	of	mind.
He	 is	 delirious,	 utterly	 uncontrolled	 and	 distracted.	 At	 the	 moment
there	seem	to	be	but	two	possible	remedies	for	him—not	in	the	sense
that	they	can	wipe	out	the	past,	but	possibly	guard	him	against	future
happenings.	One	would	be	F.;	the	other,	military	service.	He	has	been
deprived	of	both.	When	all	is	said	and	done,	I	could	not	disagree	with
him	about	not	writing.	Does	his	writing	not	cause	more	sorrow	than
his	silence?

Affectionately,	Franz

I	haven’t	received	the	promised	letter	about	my	visit	to	Berlin.	But	for
the	time	being	it	could	only	apply	to	a	Sunday,	since	vacations	for
all	exempted	men20	have	recently	been	cancelled.

[PICTURE	POSTCARD]
[řičany,	presumably	summer	1915]

One	night’s	vacation.	Kind	regards
Franz

Address:	S.	Fr.	[Sophie	Friedmann]
Waldenburg,	Prussian	Silesia
Fürstensteiner	Str.	66

Max	Brod	sends	best	wishes.

[POSTMARK:	Prague,	December	5,	1915]

Dear	Felice,	everything	is	unchanged;	as	long	as	the	stabbing	pains	in
my	 head	 go	 no	 deeper,	 I	 am	 thankful.	 This	 is	 also	 why	 I	 am	 not
writing,	as	I	have	explained	before,	but	there	are	other	good	reasons.



No	doubt	you	can	still	remember	what	I	was	like	in	Karlsbad.	Now,	if
it’s	possible,	I	am	even	worse.	I	don’t	want	a	man	in	this	state	to	be
thrust	at	you,	you	mustn’t	see	me	like	this;	 in	any	case,	 I	don’t	even
know	if	you	could	come	to	Bodenbach,	and	of	course	I	can’t	come	to
Berlin,	 for	 I	haven’t	 got	 a	passport.	But	 as	 I	 said,	 I	have	no	wish	 to
show	my	face	in	Bodenbach	either,	I	don’t	even	show	it	in	Prague.	By
which	I	don’t	mean	that	I	am	entirely	without	hope.	How	could	I	live
without	hope?
But	 surely	 there	 is	 no	 immediate	 obstacle	 to	 prevent	 you	 from

writing.	Why	don’t	I	occasionally	hear	something	about	you?	You	are
unhappy	 about	me?	What	 can	 I	 do?	 I	 do	 believe	 that	 even	 the	 true
voice	of	an	angel	from	heaven	could	not	raise	my	spirits;	so	low	have
I	 sunk.	 If	 you	 were	 to	 ask	 why,	 I	 could	 offer	 little	 more	 than
extraneous	 explanations;	 even	 mentioning	 my	 insomnia	 and
headaches	would	be	extraneous—however	grave	and	real	these	are.
The	parcel	for	your	sister	will	be	mailed	tomorrow.	Soon	I	will	send

you	Max’s	new	novel,21	which	I	like	very	much.
With	kindest	regards,	Franz

What	is	Erna’s	address?	I	want	to	send	her	Metamorphosis.

Your	charming	postcards	have	arrived.	It	would	be	nice	to	meet;
nevertheless	we	 should	 not	 do	 so.	Once	 again	 it	would	 only	 be
temporary,	 and	 we	 have	 suffered	 enough	 from	 temporary
expedients.	Once	again,	even	now,	I	could	bring	you	nothing	but
disappointments,	monster	of	 insomnia	and	headaches	 that	 I	 am.
So	not	 this	 time;	 I	won’t	move	 from	Prague,	but	will	 spend	 the
holidays	creeping	along	the	old	familiar	walks.
How	 are	 you	 getting	 along	 in	 your	 job?	Have	 you	 any	 news	 of
your	brother?	And	your	family?	My	infrequent	and	insipid	replies
cannot	possibly	show	how	glad	I	am	to	hear	from	you.

F.

[POSTCARD.	POSTMARKED	ON	ARRIVAL:	Berlin,	December	24,	1915]

Dear	Felice,	just	a	few	lines	today;	a	postcard	is	also	more	likely	to	get
there,	 and	 again	 my	 head	 is	 on	 fire.	 So	 to	 your	 main	 question:
Certainly,	 I	 shall	want	 to	 reorganize	myself	 after	 the	war.	 I	want	 to
move	to	Berlin,	despite	the	official’s	notorious	fear	for	his	future,	for



here	 I	 cannot	 carry	 on.	 By	 then,	 though,	 what	 sort	 of	 man	 will	 be
undertaking	that	move?	To	judge	by	my	present	condition,	he	will	be
a	man	who	at	best	will	be	able	 to	work	 for	one	week	before	 finally
reaching	the	end	of	his	strength.	What	a	night	this	has	been!	What	a
day!	I	should	have	left	in	1912.

Kindest	regards,	Franz

[ON	THE	VERSO]	Almost	the	first	I	knew	about	the	Fontane	Prize	was	from
the	papers;	 the	publisher	had	vaguely	prepared	me	 for	 it	 some	 time
ago.	 I	 don’t	 know	 Sternheim,22	 neither	 personally	 nor	 by
correspondence.	Metamorphosis	 has	 been	 published	 in	 book	 form;	 it
looks	nice	bound.23	If	you	like,	I’ll	send	it	to	you.	Erna’s	address?	Did
the	parcel	arrive	safely?
[POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Prague,	December	26,	1915]
Dear	 Felice,	 very	 laudable,	 that	 trip	 to	 Garmisch.	 Certainly	 much
healthier	 than	anything	else.	 I	 too—and	not	only	on	 this	occasion—
have	toyed	with	the	idea	of	a	trip	to	Prague.	But	all	things	considered,
it’s	better	that	you	don’t	come.—Muzzi’s	birthday	present,	depending
on	 my	 taste,	 and	 on	 whether	 anything	 decent	 (above	 all,	 picture
books)	 can	 be	 obtained	 in	 a	 hurry,	will	 be	 packed	up	 tomorrow.—I
should	like	to	ask	for	one	copy	of	all	snapshots	taken	in	Garmisch.	A
Herr	S.	Stein,	in	whose	house	I	am	living,	is	now	on	a	visit	to	his	son-
in-law,	Dr.	S.	Friedländer,	Charlottenburg,	Kaiserdamm	113.	Send	him
the	 photographs,	 then	 I’ll	 get	 them	 quickly.	 But	 he	 is	 staying	 for
certain	only	until	the	31st;	it	is	most	unlikely,	though	possible,	that	he
will	prolong	his	stay.

Kindest	regards,	Franz

[POSTMARK:	Prague,	January	18,	1916]
Dear	Felice,	actually	the	first	time	for	10	days	that	I	pick	up	a	pen	in
order	to	write	something	for	myself.	This	is	how	I	live.
I	was	unable	 to	answer	your	 last	 letter	at	once.	 It	was	not	what	 I
had	expected;	that	picture	of	you	in	the	snow	was	different.	And	yet,	I
do	understand—and	 it	 is	 terrible.	 I	know	 it,	but	 I	 can’t	 think	of	any
solution,	and	I	don’t	know	where	you	could	see	a	solution	that	hasn’t
been	tried	before.	No	change	is	possible	now,	but	even	later,	even	at
best?	At	best	 I	would	come	 to	Berlin,	a	man	consumed	by	 insomnia



and	headaches.	(The	other	day	quite	unexpectedly	I	heard	a	piece	of
good	news	that	didn’t	concern	me	personally	in	any	way,	but	which	in
the	 past	might	well	 have	made	me	 happy	 for	 a	while.	 But	 now	my
state	 of	 mind	 is	 such	 that	 for	 an	 instant	 this	 information	made	me
literally	 lose	all	 reason,	and	 for	a	day	and	a	night	 I	 felt	as	 though	a
tight	net	with	thin,	cutting	cords	were	clamped	on	my	head.)	So	it’s	as
this	kind	of	man,	Felice,	that	I	shall	be	coming	to	Berlin	after	the	war.
My	 first	 task	 will	 be	 to	 crawl	 into	 some	 hole	 and	 examine	 myself.
What	will	be	 the	outcome?	Needless	 to	 say,	 the	 living	man	 in	me	 is
hopeful,	which	 is	not	 surprising.	The	 thinking	man,	however,	 is	not.
Yet	even	the	thinking	man	maintains	that	though	in	the	end	I	do	away
with	myself	in	that	hole,	I	shall	have	done	the	best	I	could	do	at	the
time.	But	you,	Felice?	I	have	no	right	to	you,	not	until	I	emerge	from
that	hole,	emerge	from	it	somehow.	So	until	then	you	too	will	not	see
me	for	what	I	am,	because	to	you,	and	quite	rightly	so,	I	am	at	present
—whether	in	the	Askanische	Hof,	in	Karlsbad,	or	in	the	Tiergarten—a
naughty	child,	a	madman,	or	something	of	the	kind;	a	naughty	child
whom	 you	 treat	 with	 undeserved	 kindness,	 when	 it	 ought	 to	 be
deserved.
This	is	the	prospect	that	presents	itself	to	my	burning	head.	It	could
be	attractive	when	standing	on	tiptoe;	but	since	one	cannot	stand	like
this	indefinitely,	it	is	desperate,	I	don’t	deny	it.

Yesterday	 I	 received	 from	 your	 sister	 a	 charming	 letter	 which
embarrasses	 me,	 because	 I	 can	 claim	 no	 merit	 whatever	 for
dispatching	 the	 parcel	 to	 Muzzi;	 mine	 was	 merely	 the	 mediocre
choice.	(Of	course,	the	20	marks	more	than	covered	the	cost	of	both
parcels.)	A	pretty	picture	of	Muzzi	was	enclosed.	A	somewhat	fanciful
photograph.	Muzzi	holding	a	palette	in	front	of	a	picture	(stork	with
baby).	What	an	intelligent,	pretty,	well-built	child	she	is.	I	sent	far	too
small	and	far	too	poor	a	selection—so	it	occurred	to	me	at	sight	of	the
picture.

Your	last	letter	was	supposed	to	have	enclosed	a	snapshot.	It	was	not
enclosed.	To	me	this	is	a	privation.

You	complain	of	my	not	writing	much.	After	what	I	have	said,	what
am	I	to	write?	Is	not	every	word	a	tug	at	the	nerves	of	both	writer	and
reader,	nerves	which	surely	need	to	be	soothed,	or	rather	need	work,
though	work	of	a	different	kind:	work	that	makes	for	happiness.	Now



that	 I	 think	 about	 this	 letter,	 it	 seems	 as	 though	 I	 had	 compiled	 it
carefully	in	order	to	torment.	And	this	I	certainly	did	not	mean	to	do;
I	meant	just	the	opposite.

Franz

[POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Prague,	January	24,	1916]

Dear	Felice—I	accept	the	book	with	many	thanks	(I	don’t	know	it;	all	I
know	is	that	the	man	is	a	great	friend	of	Dr.	Weiss);	but	what	about
the	reproach?	Are	not	my	letters	more	terrible	than	my	silence?	And
my	 life	 even	 worse	 than	 that?	 And	 on	 the	 whole	 not	 unlike	 the
tortures	I	 inflict?	But	within	my	power	and	with	your	help	I	can	see
no	 remedy	 other	 than	 to	wait,	 even	 if	 one	 is	 ground	 to	 dust	 in	 the
process.	I	know	of	no	other.	What	is	silence	compared	to	this	kind	of
writing?	Isn’t	the	former	more	desirable?	I	would	like	to	open	a	trap
door	under	my	feet,	and	allow	myself	 to	disappear	 to	a	place	where
the	wretched	 remnants	 of	my	 remaining	 powers	 could	 be	 preserved
for	some	future	freedom.	That’s	all	I	know.

Kindest	regards,	Franz

[Presumably	March	1916]
Dearest	Felice!	Making	a	cold	the	reason	for	my	silence	was	simply	a
short	cut.	I	did	have	a	cold,	and	I	did	stay	in	bed	for	a	day,	then	went
out	for	2	days,	didn’t	like	what	I	found	outside,	and	went	back	to	bed
for	2	days—my	cold,	however,	was	not	the	real	reason	for	staying	at
home;	I	went	to	bed	out	of	general	confusion	and	helplessness,	hoping
that	this	change,	which	I	was	still	just	capable	of	making,	would	bring
relief.	For	 I	 am	desperate,	 like	a	 caged	 rat,	 insomnia	and	headaches
tearing	at	me;	how	I	get	through	the	days	is	quite	beyond	description.
To	be	free	from	the	office	is	my	only	possible	salvation,	my	primary
desire.	 There	 are	 difficulties:	 the	 factory,	 alleged	 indispensability	 at
the	office,	which	is	very	busy	at	the	moment	(incidental	result:	office
hours	of	8–2	and	4–6);	but	all	these	particular	difficulties	should	be	as
nothing	compared	to	the	necessity	of	breaking	free,	compared	to	this
continued	 downhill	 slide.	 But	 I	 haven’t	 the	 strength;	 even	 lesser
difficulties	would	be	too	great.	 It’s	not	 that	 I’m	afraid	of	 life	outside
the	 office;	 the	 fever	 that	 heats	my	 head	 day	 and	 night	 comes	 from



lack	of	freedom,	and	yet	as	soon	as	my	chief	begins	to	complain	that
the	department	will	collapse	if	I	leave	(ridiculous	idea,	the	absurdity
of	which	 is	 only	 too	 transparent),	 that	 he	 himself	 is	 ill,	 etc.,	 then	 I
cannot	do	it,	the	conditioned	official	in	me	cannot	do	it.	And	so	these
nights,	these	days,	go	on.
If	you,	Felice,	are	in	any	way	to	blame	for	our	common	misfortune
(omitting	for	the	moment	my	own	share,	which	is	monumental),	it	is
for	your	 insistence	on	keeping	me	 in	Prague,	although	you	ought	 to
have	 realized	 that	 it	was	precisely	 the	office	and	Prague	 that	would
lead	to	my—thus	our—eventual	ruin.	I	don’t	say	you	wanted	to	keep
me	 here	 deliberately,	 this	 is	 not	 what	 I	 think;	 your	 ideas	 about
possible	ways	of	life	are	more	courageous	and	more	flexible	than	mine
(I	am	up	to	the	waist	in	Austrian	officialdom,	and	over	and	above	that
in	my	own	personal	inhibitions),	so	you	did	not	have	any	compelling
urge	to	consider	the	future	carefully.	All	the	same	you	ought	to	have
been	able	to	assess	or	at	least	to	sense	this	in	me,	even	against	myself,
even	contrary	to	my	own	words.	 In	that	case	I	would	not	have	been
against	you	for	a	moment.	What	happened	instead?	Instead	we	went
to	 buy	 furniture	 in	 Berlin	 for	 an	 official	 in	 Prague.	Heavy	 furniture
which	 looked	 as	 if,	 once	 in	 position,	 it	 could	 never	 be	 removed.	 Its
very	 solidity	 is	 what	 you	 appreciated	 most.	 The	 sideboard	 in
particular—a	perfect	tombstone,	or	a	memorial	to	the	life	of	a	Prague
official—oppressed	me	profoundly.	If	during	our	visit	to	the	furniture
store	a	funeral	bell	had	begun	tolling	in	the	distance,	it	wouldn’t	have
been	 inappropriate.	 I	wanted	 to	 be	with	 you,	 Felice,	 of	 course	with
you,	but	free	to	express	my	powers	which	you,	in	my	opinion	at	least,
cannot	really	have	respected	if	you	could	consider	stifling	them	with
all	that	furniture.	An	old	story;	forgive	me.	But	immensely	worthwhile
discussing	as	long	as	it	isn’t	replaced	by	a	new	and	better	one.

Affectionately,	yours,	Franz

[Presumably	the	postscript	to	this	letter]
Everything	 I	have	written	 sounds	 so	 severe;	 I	 cannot	 send	 it	off
like	 this,	 for	 I	 don’t	mean	 to	be	 severe,	 but	 I	 am	 so	 thoroughly
lacerated	and	shaken	that	I	cannot	be	held	entirely	responsible.	I
read,	 for	 example,	 that	 you	 have	 a	 cold,	 yet	 for	 a	 long	 time	 I
cannot	really	take	it	in,	I	am	so	hemmed	in	by	ghosts	from	which
the	office	prevents	me	freeing	myself.	Day	and	night	they	cling	to
me;	if	only	I	were	free	it	would	be	my	supreme	delight	to	chase



them	at	my	will,	but	as	it	is,	they	gradually	do	me	in.	As	long	as	I
am	not	free	I	don’t	wish	to	be	seen,	and	I	don’t	wish	to	see	you.
How	utterly	wrong	you	are,	how	sadly	wrong,	 if	you	seek	other
explanations.
I	have	only	 just	started	reading	the	book;	on	the	whole	 I	 stay

away	 from	 everything,	 including	 books.	 It	 is	 extremely	 clumsy;
but	it	does	manage	to	produce	one	distinctive	character,	of	whom
for	the	time	being	I	really	don’t	know	what	to	think.	In	any	case	I
am	not	a	critic,	am	no	good	at	analyzing,	easily	misunderstand,
frequently	miss	the	point,	and	am	left	 in	doubt	as	to	the	overall
impression.
Has	Tycho	Brahe	 arrived?	 I	 asked	 the	 publishers	 to	 send	 it	 to

you	 long	 ago.	 And	 the	 Jüngste	 Tag	 Almanac1	 which	 I	 sent	 by
registered	mail?

[IN	THE	MARGIN]	Thank	you	for	the	clippings.	I	have	to	spell	out	the	word
asbestos	in	order	to	read	it,	it’s	so	remote	from	me.2

[TELEGRAM	 TO:	 Felice	 Bauer,	 Technical	Workshop,	 Berlin,	Markusstrasse
52.	Prague,	April	6,	1916]

passport	refused	kindest	regards	=	Franz

[POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Karlsbad,	April	9,	1916]

Dear	Felice—in	Karlsbad	for	2	days	on	business.	Ottla	is	with	me.	The
first	thing	we	did	last	night—just	as	we	went	to	Goethe’s	house	on	our
first	night	in	Weimar3—was	to	visit	the	Villa	Tannhäuser.	Everything
here	 is	different	 from	last	year,	except	 for	 the	usual	bad	night.	 I	got
your	 letter	yesterday	before	 leaving.	 Is	 it	a	good	thing	 to	write	such
letters,	 good	 for	 you,	 good	 for	 me?	 Certainly	 not.	 In	 view	 of	 the
present	situation	it	cannot	possibly	help.	I	can’t	come	to	Waldenburg4
because,	as	you	know,	I	can’t	get	a	passport—unless	I	have	an	official
letter	from	Berlin	confirming	the	necessity	of	my	journey.

Kindest	regards,	Franz



[IN	THE	MARGIN]	Kind	regards,	yours,	Ottla

[Beginning	of	April	1916]
Dear	 Felice,	 your	 letter	 and	 the	 first	 pleasant	 spring	 day	 arrived
together.	 It	 is	 also	 good	 to	 read	 what	 you	 have	 to	 say.	 But	 you
shouldn’t	deny	how	much	furniture	means	to	you,	not	those	particular
pieces	of	furniture,	nor	furniture	as	such,	but	the	things	that	go	with
it,	the	things	that	are,	so	to	speak,	halfway	between	entertaining	and
domestic	 peace,	 the	 things	 for	 example	 that	 you	 considered	 “so
delightfully	 cozy”	 at	 Waldenburg.	 This	 is	 neither	 hair-splitting	 nor
nastiness	 on	my	 part;	 while	 saying	 it	 I	 might	 well	 be	 holding	 your
clenched	 hand	 in	mine.	 The	 buying	 of	 furniture	 was	 fundamentally
not	 your	 concern,	 but	 mine,	 and	 I	 did	 carry	 it	 out,	 if	 not	 very
successfully.—I	warn	 you,	 as	 well	 as	myself,	 against	meeting;	 think
seriously	of	earlier	meetings	and	you	will	cease	to	want	 it.	Happily–
unhappily	 you	 don’t	 always	 suffer	 from	 toothache,	 nor	 am	 I	 always
allowed	to	fetch	the	aspirin,	nor	always	in	a	position,	face	to	face	in
the	 passage,	 to	 show	my	 affection.	 So	 no	meeting.—Dr.	Weiss,	with
whom	 I	 have	 been	 in	 constant	 correspondence,	 has	 been	 in	 Prague
recently,	will	be	coming	back,	and	is	then	going	to	Berlin.	Our	ways
have	parted	completely,	at	 least	 for	the	time	being,	 in	circumstances
precisely	similar	to	those	of	that	bygone	scene	at	the	Askanische	Hof.
This,	 I	mean	 the	 similarity,	 is	 not	 particularly	 surprising.	Ultimately
the	basic	accusations	that	can	be	leveled	against	me	are	invariably	the
same,	 and	 their	 chief	 exponent	 and	 nearest-of-kin	 is,	 after	 all,	 my
father.—The	 birthday	 present	 for	 your	 sister	 has	 of	 course	 been
dispatched.—Are	you	being	given	a	vacation?

Kindest	regards,	Franz

[POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Prague,	April	14,	1916]

Dear	Felice,	I’m	going	to	send	more	postcards	from	now	on,	letters	are
too	slow;5	 in	 any	 case	 it	 is	 less	 a	 question	 of	 imparting	 information
than	of	making	sure	of	each	other.	At	Easter	I	shall	be	in	Marienbad,
where	I	have	some	business	to	transact	on	Easter	Tuesday.	If	possible	I
shall	 take	my	 vacation	 as	 early	 as	May.	 I	 simply	 can’t	 stand	 it	 any
longer.	Actually,	neither	there	nor	here.	My	headaches	were	no	better



in	Karlsbad	than	in	Prague.	I	would	be	better	off	at	the	front.	Musil6—
do	you	 remember	him?—came	 to	 see	me	 today,	a	 first	 lieutenant	 in
the	infantry—ill,	and	yet	in	fairly	good	shape.

Kindest	regards,	Franz

[POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Prague,	April	19,	1916]

Dear	Felice,	how	delightfully	quick!	Thank	you	also	for	the	clippings.
—As	for	Dr.	Weiss,	you	misunderstood	me.	As	long	as	I	am	no	better,
we	 want	 to	 have	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 each	 other.	 A	 very	 sensible
solution.	 Slightly	marred,	 however,	 by	 the	 recent	 arrival	 of	 his	 new
book.7	But	what	an	outstanding	writer	he	is!	You	absolutely	must	read
the	 book!	 Though	 he	 is	 in	 Berlin	 at	 the	moment,	 I	 don’t	 see	 that	 a
meeting	 between	 you	 and	 him	 could	 possibly	 be	 of	 advantage	 to
anyone	 or	 anything.	 On	 the	 contrary.—I	 am	 spending	 Easter	 in
Marienbad,	where	I	have	some	official	business	on	Easter	Tuesday.—
The	other	day	 I	went	 to	 see	a	nerve	specialist;	a	pretty	useless	visit.
Diagnosis:	 Cardiac	 Neurosis.	 Therapy:	 Electrical	 treatment.	 Went
home,	and	wrote	canceling	the	appointment.	What	would	be	the	good
of	treating	the	consequences	of	a	condition?—Enjoy	your	Easter.	My
journeys	are	invariably	stripped	of	pleasure	before	they	start.

Affectionately,	Franz

[POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Prague,	April	25,	1916]

Dear	 Felice,	 I	 didn’t	 go	 to	 Marienbad,	 the	 official	 trip	 had	 to	 be
postponed,	it	may	take	place	about	mid-May;	if	so,	I	shall	combine	it
with	my	vacation	and	stay	in	Marienbad	for	3	weeks,	lead	a	quiet	life,
the	 way	 I	 like	 it,	 and	 as	 far	 as	 headaches	 and	 self-reproaches	 will
permit.	But	then	I	shall	return	to	Prague	to	find	my	lot	possibly	 less
worth	 living	 for	 even	 than	 hitherto.	 And	 you?	 Your	 Easter?	 Your
vacation?	Your	chief?	 I	have	spent	these	Easter	days	all	on	my	own,
merely	scribbling	away	for	myself	in	order	to	see	whether	at	the	end
of	 these	 2	 years	 I	 can	 still	 manage	 a	 single	 sentence;	 I	 have	 been
moving	back	and	forth	between	the	street,	my	desk,	and	the	sofa	and,
except	 for	 one	 day,	 felt	 reasonably	well,	 except	 for	 one	 day	when	 I



was	simply	lashed	by	anxiety,	and	headaches	sawed	through	my	head.
And	herewith	the	rigmarole	ends.

Kindest	regards,	Franz

[POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Prague,	April	28,	1916]

Dear	Felice,	3	postcards	arrived	today,	two	from	Altwasser,	where	is
that?	 And	 one	 from	 Waldenburg,	 written	 in	 good	 spirits,	 which
delights	me.—Of	course	 I	 remember	your	aunt,	despite	 the	 fact	 that
where	 others	 store	 their	 memory	 for	 people,	 I	 have	 but	 a	 void.	 I
hardly	 recall	 her	 face,	 but	 I	 do	 remember	 how	 very	 animated,
interested,	and	communicative	she	was;	I	would	have	given	her	a	long
and	active	 life.	What	did	she	die	of?	 I	 remember	very	distinctly	 two
occasions	 when	 she	 certainly	 had	 the	 upper	 hand.	 Once	 on	 the
Hundekehlensee,	 and	 once	 in	 a	 coffeehouse,	 I	 think	 in	 the
Tauentzienpalast.8	 The	 3	 of	 us	 were	 sitting	 squashed	 together	 at	 a
table,	and	she	was	giving	you	advice	for	the	future.	Not	appropriate—
either	for	you,	or	for	me.

Kindest	regards,	Franz

[TELEGRAM	 TO:	 Felice	 Bauer,	 Technical	Workshop,	 Berlin,	Markusstrasse
52.	Prague,	May	6,	1916]

received	letters	only	today	no	reproaches	on	that	account	please
neither	voiced	nor	silent	affectionately	franz

[POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Prague,	May	7,	1916]

Dear	 Felice—postcards	 again.	 I	 have	 had	 such	 a	 bad	 week	 that	 to
write	would	 have	 been	 an	 outrage.	Many	 thanks	 for	 the	 letters	 and
forgive	my	terrible	lapse	of	memory.	Even	when	I	was	in	Berlin	your
relatives	passed	like	shadows	before	my	sleepless	eyes,	and	since	then
my	 memory	 has	 certainly	 not	 improved.	 For	 some	 extraordinary
reason	I	mistook	Frau	Klara	(probably	Levin)	for	Aunt	Danzinger,	and
even	 incorporated	 her	 in	 Frau	 Wachsmann.	 Quite	 an	 achievement.
Anyway	I	realize	I	haven’t	the	faintest	memory	of	Aunt	Natalie;	all	 I



see	in	the	direction	of	her	chair—when	we	were	sitting	in	that	room
in	Berlin,	the	plans	of	the	apartment	spread	out	before	us—is	a	dark
blob.

Affectionately,	Franz

[POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Prague,	May	11,	1916]

Dear	Felice—but	there	are	also	other	lapses	of	memory:	for	example,
Frau	Sophie’s	remark	that	I	had	written	to	her,	etc.	I	don’t	remember
having	written	 to	 her	 since	 those	 far-off	 days	when	 I	 begged	her	 to
find	you,	and	she	was	kind	enough	to	do	so.	And	 least	of	all	with	a
complaint	of	 this	nature.—Meanwhile	Weiss’s	novel	will	 surely	have
reached	you.	Read	 it	 carefully;	 try	 to	detect	 the	man	behind	 it.	The
parting	of	our	ways—at	first	my	doing,	then	his,	and	finally	brought
about	 by	 me—was	 perfectly	 right	 and	 the	 result	 of	 an	 absolutely
definite	 decision,	 which	 for	 me	 at	 any	 rate	 is	 certainly	 rare.—My
vacation	is	in	doubt	once	again.	I	am	going	to	Marienbad	on	Saturday,
but	probably	on	business	only.	More	about	this	shortly.

Kindest	regards,	Franz

[LETTERHEAD:	Hotel	Neptun,	Marienbad]
[Marienbad,	probably	May	14,	1916]

Dear	Felice—on	business	in	Karlsbad	and	Marienbad,	this	time	alone.
There	are	ghosts	that	haunt	one	in	company	and	those	that	haunt	one
in	 solitude;	 now	 it’s	 the	 latter’s	 turn,	 especially	 when	 it’s	 raining,
chilly,	 and	 the	 yard	 is	 full	 of	 cab-drivers’	 gossip.	 Nevertheless	 I
wouldn’t	mind	staying	here	alone	for	several	months	in	order	to	take
stock	of	my	position.	Time	passes,	and	one	passes	with	it,	pointlessly.
It	is	rather	gloomy,	and	one	doesn’t	even	need	any	special	aptitude	to
be	constantly	reminded	of	these	things.	I	feel	like	brushing	the	hair	off
your	forehead,	and	consulting	your	eyes	on	the	subject,	but	the	hand
sinks	as	it	approaches.
My	most	determined	effort	so	far	to	quit	the	office—higher	degrees
still	exist!—is	almost	over,	and	almost	entirely	unsuccessful.	The	latest
is	 that	 exempted	 men	 should	 have	 only	 a	 very	 short	 vacation,	 and
even	this	only	in	exceptional	circumstances—and	as	an	act	of	favor.	I



made	 this	 the	 occasion—which	 was	 quite	 clever—for	 writing	 the
director	a	letter	in	which,	after	giving	detailed	reasons,	omitted	here,	I
asked	 for	one	of	 two	 things:	 in	 the	event	of	 the	war	being	over	 this
autumn,	for	a	long	leave	without	pay;	or,	should	the	war	not	be	over,
my	 reclassification.	 You	 are	 bound	 to	 see	 the	 insincerity	 of	 it	 (the
reasons	given	were	even	more	insincere),	and	no	doubt	it	is	this	that
will	 rob	 me	 of	 success.	 The	 director	 considers	 my	 first	 request	 as
merely	 funny,	 the	 second	 he	 ignores,	 and	 probably	 he	 is	 not
altogether	wrong	if	judged	by	the	contrived	reasons	I	gave	(rewritten
3	times	from	beginning	to	end).	He	considers	the	whole	thing	simply
an	 attempt	 to	 extort	 my	 usual	 vacation,	 offers	 it	 to	 me	 at	 once,
declaring	 it	 had	always	been	his	 intention	 to	do	 so.	 I	 reply	 that	 the
vacation	had	never	 been	 among	my	prime	 considerations,	 it	 doesn’t
do	 me	 much	 good,	 and	 I	 can	 do	 without	 it.	 This	 he	 does	 not
understand,	nor	 is	he	able	 to	understand	 it.	Nor	can	he	 imagine	 the
cause	 of	 my	 nervous	 condition,	 so	 starts	 talking	 like	 a	 psychiatrist.
Characteristically,	 after	 mentioning	 a	 number	 of	 worries	 that	 had
tried	his	nerves	and	had	been	or	were	preying	on	his	mind,	but	which
could	 in	 no	way	 apply	 to	me,	 he	 said:	 “Besides,	 you	 need	 have	 no
fears	concerning	your	position	and	your	career,	whereas	I	in	my	early
days	had	 enemies	who	even	 tried	 to	damage	 that	mainspring	of	my
life.”	Mainspring!	Where	 does	my	mainspring	 rise,	 and	who	 tries	 to
damage	it?	But	while	in	fact	it	is	being	damaged,	though	neither	with
the	tools	nor	in	the	manner	my	director	imagines,	I	go	on	telling	lies
with	 the	 irresponsibility	of	a	child,	albeit	under	pressure.	 I	 can	only
cope	 with	 the	 simplest	 practical	 tasks	 by	 staging	 outrageously
sentimental	scenes;	but	how	difficult	this	is!	The	lies	and	stratagems,
the	 time	 it	 takes,	 and	 the	 remorse!	And	 if	 it	 fails,	 all	 one	 can	 do	 is
agree.	But	I	cannot	help	myself.	If	I	want	to	turn	right,	I	first	turn	left,
then	strive	sadly	toward	the	right	(automatically	the	sadness	spreads
to	 all	 concerned	 and	 is	 the	 most	 unpleasant	 part	 of	 it).	 The	 main
reason	may	be	fear:	I	need	not	be	afraid	of	turning	left,	since	I	don’t
really	want	to	go	there	at	all.	The	way	I	resigned	from	my	first	job	is	a
typical	 example:	 I	 resigned	 not	 because	 I	 had	 found	 a	 better	 job,
though	this	was	true,	but	because	I	couldn’t	bear	the	manner	in	which
an	old	employee	was	being	upbraided.—Well,	enough	 for	 today,	 the
sun	too	is	beginning	to	break	through.

Kindest	regards,	Franz



[POSTCARD]
[Marienbad,	mid-May	1916]

Dear	 Felice,	 the	 letter	 was	 written	 on	 arrival	 during	 a	 tempestuous
rainstorm,	 this	 postcard	 shortly	 before	 my	 departure.	 Karlsbad	 is
rather	pleasant,	but	Marienbad	is	unbelievably	beautiful.	A	long	time
ago	 I	 ought	 to	 have	 followed	 my	 instinct	 which	 tells	 me	 that	 the
fattest	are	also	the	wisest.	After	all,	one	can	diet	anywhere,	no	need	to
pay	homage	to	mineral	springs,	but	only	here	can	one	wander	about
in	woods	such	as	these.	Just	now	in	fact	the	beauty	is	enhanced	by	the
peace	 and	 solitude	 as	 well	 as	 by	 the	 eager	 receptivity	 of	 all	 things
animate	and	inanimate;	while	it	is	hardly	affected	by	the	overcast	and
windy	weather.	 I	 imagine	 if	 I	were	a	Chinese	and	were	about	 to	go
home	(indeed	I	am	a	Chinese	and	am	going	home),	I	would	make	sure
of	returning	soon,	and	at	any	price.	How	you	would	love	it!

Affectionately,	Franz

[POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Prague,	May	26,	1916]

Dear	Felice,	 for	 the	moment	 just	a	word	of	 thanks,	above	all	 for	 the
picture.	(Has	your	face	got	thinner?)	Not	knowing	what	to	do	with	the
other	 pictures,	 I	 am	 sending	 them	 to	 Max.	 I	 have	 been	 back	 from
Marienbad	 for	 nearly	 two	weeks,	 and	 for	 a	 great	 variety	 of	 reasons
have	 not	 written.	 Driven	 all	 over	 the	 place,	 my	 headaches	 alone
remain	 constant.	 Passport	 unobtainable.	 More	 about	 Weiss	 in	 due
course.	Amused	by	your	inquiries	about	my	uncle	whom	you	insist	on
establishing	in	Milan,	instead	of	Madrid.	A	minor	satisfaction,	though
hardly	 to	 be	 compared	 to	 my	 treatment	 of	 Frau	 Wachsmann.—My
long	 leave	 is	 meant	 to	 be	 what	 you	 suggest,	 though	 it	 is	 aimed	 at
making	the	break	easier	rather	than	at	safeguarding	the	future.

Affectionately,	Franz

[POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Prague,	May	26,	1916]

Dear	Felice,	it’s	afternoon	in	the	office,	my	headache	is	such	that	I	can
do	nothing,	neither	work,	nor	read,	nor	sit	still—“so	you	write	to	me,”
is	what	you	think,	yet	this	would	not	be	a	rebuke.	Of	course	it	is	not



always	as	bad	as	this,	but	for	the	last	3	days,	continuous.——
A	 nice	 picture;	 but	 in	 other	 pictures	 you	 do	 look	 more	 cheerful.
Besides,	 the	 collar	 somewhat	 mars	 this	 one.	 Mephisto,	 if	 I	 am	 not
mistaken,	wears	that	kind	of	collar;	I	have	also	seen	Strindberg	in	one,
but	 you,	 Felice?	 Nevertheless	 a	 nice	 picture,	 with	 which	 you	 have
given	 me	 a	 great	 deal	 of	 pleasure.	 And	 everything	 unchanged,	 the
balcony,	 the	 trellis,	 the	 view.	 One	 tries	 to	 struggle	 through	 the
memories	 of	 troubled	 times.—What	 is	 happening	 about	 your
vacation?	Your	chief	already	gone?	How	about	your	family,	and	Erna,
to	whom	I	have	not	written	for	ages?

Kindest	regards,	Franz

[Presumably	May	28,	1916]
Dear	Felice,	it’s	raining	again,	it’s	Sunday	again,	but	I	am	not	relaxing
in	Marienbad;	instead	I	am	back	in	the	pit,	in	Prague,	and	for	the	past
5	days	my	head	has	been	churning	worse	than	it	has	done	for	ages.
Your	judgment	of	Weiss’s	novel	[The	Struggle]	is	cautious,	and	this	is
right.	 I	 myself	 manage	 to	 achieve	 little	 more	 than	 an	 uncertain
emotion—half	love,	half	admiration.	I	know	that	the	fire	in	the	core	of
the	book	is	a	genuine	element,	but	to	surrender	completely	to	an	alien
element	 presupposes	madness.	 (Insomnia	 and	 headaches	 are	merely
preliminaries.)	But	 it	 is	 strange	 that	 from	this	 source	a	novel	 should
emerge	 that	 a	 considerable	 number	 of	 readers	 will	 feel	 justified	 in
regarding	as	little	more	than	mere	entertainment—which	proves	that
they	are	unaware	of	 its	cutting	edge.9	You	are	aware	of	 it.	You	 say:
“Perhaps	 this	 truth	 is	 more	 than	 I	 can	 bear.”	 If	 I	 were	 asked	 to
describe	 that	 particular	 effect,	 I	would	 fail.	 I	 am	 incapable—now	at
any	rate—of	that	kind	of	probing.
I	agree,	I	do	appear	in	the	book,	but	no	more	than	many	others,	for
in	 this	 respect	 I	 am	 not	 an	 exception.	 It	 is	 the	 type	 that	 any	West
European	 Jew	 conjures	 up	 at	 once,	 at	 first	 glance	 as	 it	 were,	 the
moment	 he	 sits	 back	 and	 closes	 his	 eyes.	 If	 these	 types	 were
“powerful”	into	the	bargain,	they	would	be	downright	devilish;	this	is
where	Providence	shows	its	kindness.
As	 for	Franziska,	 I	did	want	you	 to	 tell	me	more	about	her.	Here,
after	all,	lies	the	book’s	intention.	Seize	this,	and	you	have	the	author
by	the	throat.
I	am	surprised	that	you	don’t	 find	much	new	in	 it.	 I	 find	so	much



that	 I	 am	 at	 a	 loss.	 In	 fact,	 the	 apparent	 monotony	 is	 just	 the
semiobscurity	needed	to	make	certain	things	tolerable	to	human	eyes.
It’s	a	long	time,	by	the	way,	since	I	last	read	it,	in	manuscript.	I	will
write	again	when	I	have	read	it	in	print.
In	 two	 weeks,	 especially	 if	 there	 is	 no	 improvement	 in	 my
condition,	I	am	going	to	Marienbad	for	3	weeks.	I	did	mean	to	stick	to
my	resolve	and	refrain	from	taking	a	vacation	at	present,	as	I	told	the
director	in	my	letter,	but	I	can’t	stand	it.	By	the	way,	the	things	they
are	prepared	 to	put	up	with	 from	me	at	 the	office	 surpass	 all	 office
traditions.
What	are	you	doing,	Felice,	in	your	spare	time?	It’s	ages	since	you
wrote	 to	me	 about	 this.	Did	 you	 go	 and	 see	The	 Trojan	Women?10	 I
saw	it	here	a	few	days	ago.	Werfel’s	work	is	extraordinary,	there’s	no
doubt	 about	 that;	 but	 having	 seen	 the	 performance	 (of	 the	 Lessing
Theater),	I	am	more	than	prepared	to	renounce	all	further	visits	to	the
theater	 for	 the	 rest	 of	my	 life,	 which	 in	 fact	 I	 have	 been	 doing	 for
some	time.

Affectionately,	Franz

[POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Prague,	May	30,	1916]

Dear	Felice,	for	your	diversion	I’m	sending	you	two	printed	pieces:	as
a	 pleasant	 diversion	 a	 copy	 of	 Zeitecho	 with	 an	 article	 by	 Max11
(enlarging	upon	these	basic	ideas,	he	held	a	course	of	11	lectures	this
winter,	as	well	as	lecturing	at	the	refugee	school12	for	2	hours	a	week
to	more	than	50	girls,	whom	I	joined	on	an	outing	the	other	day,	and
for	1	hour	in	a	Zionist	girls’	club13);	as	a	sad	diversion	my	Institute’s
latest	 report,	 of	 which	 approximately	 pages	 10–80	 were	 written	 by
me.	You	will	 be	 spared	 the	Anniversary	Report,	 running	 to	100-odd
pages,	as	well	as	yet	another	annual	report,	the	name	of	which	I	won’t
even	mention.—Your	Friedmann	photographs	were	much	appreciated,
especially	the	love-scene.

Affectionately,	Franz

[POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Prague,	May	31,	1916]
Dear	 Felice,	 in	 complete	 agreement,	 of	 course.	 But	 what	 is	 this
suggestion	 about	 going	 to	 a	 sanatorium?	 Is	 it	 your	 own	wish?	 That



would	 surprise	 me.	 Or	 is	 it	 a	 concession	 to	 me?	 As	 far	 as	 I	 am
concerned,	 I	 finished	with	 sanatoria	 for	 good	 last	 year;	 sick	 people,
among	whom	 I	 now	 seriously	 count	myself,	 should	 give	 sanatoria	 a
wide	berth.	This	 applies	 to	me	on	my	own;	with	you,	however,	 any
place	will	do.	The	only	thing	is:	 I	cannot	come	to	Germany,	but	you
perhaps	 to	Marienbad.	Would	 you?	 There	 are	 no	 good	 sanatoria	 in
Bohemia;	 the	 best,	 in	 Rumburg,	 is	 bad	 enough.	 For	my	 part,	 I	 had
intended	 to	 take	my	miserable	 head	 to	Marienbad	 for	Whitsun,	 but
will	await	your	decision	as	to	both	time	and	place.

Affectionately,	Franz

[POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Prague,	May	31,	1916]

Dear	Felice,	to	return	to	this	morning’s	superficially	treated	question
of	 sanatoria.	My	main	 objection	 to	 sanatoria	 is	 that	 they	waste	 too
much	of	one’s	time	and	thoughts.	During	my	brief	vacation	I	intend	to
do	 some	 work	 (as	 much	 or	 as	 little	 as	 this	 head	 of	 mine	 can	 still
manage),	and	if	you	are	there,	 I	 intend	to	be	with	you,	but	 I	do	not
intend	 to	 allow	 myself	 to	 be	 medicated,	 mudpacked,	 electrically
treated,	given	therapeutic	baths,	examined,	informed	about	the	nature
of	my	diseases	with	unusual	accuracy	owing	to	an	unusually	accurate
diagnosis;	it’s	another	office	almost,	in	the	service	of	the	body.	For	the
moment,	however,	 the	deciding	 factor	 remains:	why	do	you	want	 to
go	to	a	sanatorium?	Though	there	may	not	be	a	good	sanatorium	in
Bohemia,	there	are	some	in	Silesia,	Lower	Austria,	Styria.	All	agog	for
your	reply.

Franz



[POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Prague,	June	3,	1916]

Dear	Felice,	according	to	your	 letter	your	vacation	starts	on	the	2nd
or	3rd	of	July;	according	to	your	telegram	which,	after	all,	is	far	more
recent,	it	doesn’t	seem	to	start	before	the	middle	of	July.	If	there	is	no
definite	news	by	Monday,	I	will	send	a	telegram.—In	the	huge	book	I
keep	about	you,	your	cold	as	well	as	the	“immense	amount	of	work”
will	be	entered	on	the	debit	side.	That	wouldn’t	be	so	bad;	what	is	bad
is	that	you	torment	yourself	so	much,	while	I,	helpless	on	your	behalf,
helpless	on	mine,	am	obliged	to	look	on.—In	my	opinion	Sternheim’s
stories	 are	 remarkable,	 especially	 “Schuhlin,”	 perhaps	 the	 weakest
from	 the	 literary	 point	 of	 view.	 A	 very	 popular	 and	 very	 reluctant
representation.	 We	 can	 discuss	 it	 perhaps.—May	 we	 be	 granted	 a
happy	reunion.

Kindest	regards,	Franz

[TELEGRAM	 TO:	 Felice	 Bauer,	 Technical	Workshop,	 Berlin,	Markusstrasse
52.	Prague,	June	9,	1916]

why	no	answer

[POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Prague,	June	14,	1916]

Dear	Felice,	so	for	the	moment	we	are	agreed,	it	is	to	be	Marienbad.	A
medical	 certificate	 is	 no	 longer	 required	 in	 Germany,	 so	 you	 can
definitely	 come.	 Despite	 my	 lack	 of	 talent	 in	 these	 matters,	 I	 had
already	considered	your	reasons	in	favor	of	a	sanatorium,	but	in	fact
they	 could	be	used	 equally	well	 against	 a	 sanatorium.	And	perhaps,
though	 I	 am	 not	 sure,	 suffering,	 the	 passing	 of	 time,	 and	 other
exceptional	 circumstances	 have	 raised	 us	 a	 little	 above	 these
considerations.	 I	 should	 be	 glad	 to	 know	 the	 date	 we	 start	 our
vacation	about	10	days	in	advance—for	I	have	some	business	to	see	to
in	Tepl	 (very	near	Marienbad)	and	would	 like	 to	 take	 this	 in	on	my
way,	but	must	announce	my	arrival	in	Tepl	10	days	before.

Kindest	regards,	Franz



[POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Prague,	June	19,	1916]

Dear	Felice,	I	would	rather	not	go	on	ahead	of	you,	would	rather	wait
until	you	can	go—provided	it	is	before	August,	since	in	August	I	must
be	in	Prague.	But	if	you	can	go	toward	the	end	of	June,	it	would	suit
perfectly,	and	perhaps	by	tomorrow	I	shall	have	the	exact	date	from
you.	I	would	be	glad,	on	account	of	my	business	at	Tepl.	Yesterday,	by
the	 way,	 Max	 decided	 that	 he	 and	 his	 wife	 will	 also	 be	 coming	 to
Marienbad.	The	date	has	not	been	 settled.	His	wife’s	 youngest	 sister
has	died	of	pneumonia.	Don’t	offer	your	condolences;	she	is	dreadfully
upset,	and	doesn’t	want	to	hear	from	anyone.
I	have	no	wish	to	be	there	a	week	ahead	of	you	because	my	three

weeks	are	not	wholly	guaranteed,	and	anticipating	your	arrival	would
make	me	more	restless	than	is	good	for	one	on	a	vacation.

Franz

[TELEGRAM	 TO:	 Felice	 Bauer,	 Technical	 Workshop,	 Berlin	 O	 27,
Markusstrasse	52.	Prague,	June	27,	1916]

arriving	hotel	neptun	marienbad	sunday	evening	july	second

Joint	letter	from	Franz	Kafka	and	Felice	Bauer	to	Felice’s	mother
[LETTERHEAD:	Schloss	Balmoral	&	Osborne,	Marienbad]14

July	10,	1916
Dear	Mother,	my	right	to	this	mode	of	address	lies	not	in	the	past,	but
in	the	present.	Felice	and	I	have	met	(such	things	do	happen)	here	in
Marienbad	 and	 discovered	 that	 years	 ago	 we	 tackled	 things	 in	 the
wrong	way.	Nor	was	this	very	difficult	to	see.	Good	things,	however,
are	 not	 accomplished	 at	 the	 first	 attempt,	 nor	 at	 the	 second,	 but
perhaps	 at	 the	 ten-thousandth,	 and	 this	 is	 where	 we	 now	 are.	 And
where	we	mean	to	stay,	and	I	believe	I	can	be	sure	of	your	maternal
consent	dating	from	the	days	when	you	followed	my	last	walk	down
Mommsenstrasse	 with	 a	 friendly	 wave	 from	 your	 balcony.	 Many
things	have	changed	since	then,	few	for	the	better,	this	I	do	know;	but
one	 of	 the	 few	 is	 the	 relationship	 between	 Felice	 and	 me	 and	 its
assurance	 for	 the	 future.	This	 is	what	 I	wished	 to	 say	 to	you	 today.
Kissing	 your	 hand	most	 respectfully,	 I	 send	 kindest	 regards	 to	 Erna



and	Toni.
Yours,	Franz

Dear	Mother,
I	hope	you	will	interpret	Franz’s	words	the	way	they	are	intended.

Now	you	have	the	opportunity	to	give	him	your	love	all	over	again.	If
you	want	to	write	to	Franz,	he	is	staying	on	here	for	the	time	being,
whereas	I	have	to	leave	at	the	end	of	the	week.
In	the	hope	that	everything	will	turn	out	well	from	now	on,	I	send

you	my	affectionate	greetings.
Yours,	Felice

[POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Marienbad,	July	14,	1916]

My	 poor	 dearest,	 I	 am	writing	with	 your	 pen,	 your	 ink,	 sleeping	 in
your	 bed,	 sitting	 on	 your	 balcony—this	 would	 be	 all	 right,	 but
through	 the	 single	door	 I	 can	hear	 the	noise	 in	 the	corridor	and	 the
noise	 of	 couples	 on	 either	 side.	 Those	 damnable	 people	 downstairs,
led	by	that	little	devil,	have	changed	rooms,	or	rather	they	needed	a
double	 room,	 and	 so	made	 the	 change.15	 Now	 that	 you	 have	 left,	 I
haven’t	the	strength	to	look	for	another	room.—Two	postcards	for	you
from	Frl.	Erna	have	arrived,	as	well	 as	one	postcard	and	a	 telegram
from	Frl.	Grete:	there’s	nothing	in	them	that	can’t	wait	until	you	see
them,	 except	 perhaps	 that	 Frl.	 Erna	 is	 kept	 on	 the	 run	 by	 her
dressmaker.—I	 am	 on	my	way	 to	 the	 Dianahof,	 to	 think	 about	 you
while	staring	at	my	butter	dish.	Many,	many	regards.

Franz

[POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Marienbad,	July	15,	1916]

My	dear	Felice,	to	be	alone	yet	not	to	have	the	consolation	of	a	quiet
room	is	hard	 indeed.	Desperate,	 in	 terror	of	domestic	noises,	 I	 spent
yesterday	evening	desperately	roaming	about	the	municipal	park—the
park!—along	 the	 Korso—the	Korso!—and	 yet	 returned	 far	 too	 soon,
unwilling	hearer	of	all	noise.	How	on	earth	could	you	have	endured



that	room!	This	morning	I	went	in	search	of	somewhere	else	to	stay,
but	 found	nothing,	 since	no	one	will	 let	a	decent	 room	for	only	one
week.—Instead	of	attending	the	laying	of	the	foundation	stone,	I	went
to	the	Dianahof	with	Erdmuthe;16	I	hope	you	don’t	mind	my	not	being
able	 to	 describe	 the	 ceremony.	 At	 the	 Dianahof	 I	 struck	 up	 a
conversation	 with	 Liselotte,	 the	 tiny	 round-cheeked	 one,	 and
yesterday,	 while	 fastening	 a	 rose	 to	 her	 breast,	 I	 gave	 her	 a	 lot	 of
advice.

Franz

[POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Marienbad,	July	16,	1916]

Dearest,	 poor	 dearest	 (oh,	 how	 the	 old	 couple	 next	 door	 keep
chattering),	 alone	 on	 the	 familiar	 walks,	 and	 yet	 on	 the	 whole	 it
would	 be	 all	 right,	 except	 that	 I	 do	 nothing	 but	 rest.	 For	 I	 am
confident	as	far	as	you	are	concerned,	as	confident	as	we	can	possibly
be	at	this	moment,	after	our	fashion.	You	too	should	take	advantage
of	 this	 confidence,	 I	 do	 beg	 you.	 Start,	 perhaps,	 by	 giving	 up
crunching	lumps	of	sugar,	the	road	to	the	summit	is	infinite.	(Now	the
old	 gentleman	 is	 stumbling	 heavily	 out	 of	 bed.)—My	 parting
conversation	with	little	Helen:	“You	gave	us	bad	advice,	that	train	had
no	connection.”	“Didn’t	it?	I	thought	you	were	bicycling.”	“We	didn’t
have	bicycles.”	“Didn’t	you?	In	that	case	you	could	have	gone	to	see
Eger,	very	lovely.”	“But	we	had	announced	our	arrival	for	11	o’clock.”
“Had	you?	In	that	case	you	could	have	walked,	lovely	walk.”	“But	we
had	our	 luggage.”	 “Had	you?	 In	 that	 case	you	could	have	 taken	 the
coach,	lovely	drive.”	“Thanks,	that’s	what	we	did,	but	in	doing	so	we
used	up	the	money	for	your	tip.”

Franz

[POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Marienbad,	July	18,	1916]
My	dearest—first	and	foremost:	headaches	 for	 the	past	2	days,	don’t
know	 why	 or	 what	 for.	 Are	 they	 the	 aftermath?	 Or	 eternal
companions?—Imagine,	 we	 were	 not	 even	 aware	 of	 the	 most
distinguished	 visitor	 to	 Marienbad,	 a	 man	 in	 whom	 so	 many	 place
their	 trust:	 the	 Rabbi	 from	 Belz,	 no	 doubt	 at	 present	 the	 chief
representative	of	Hasidism.	He	has	been	here	3	weeks.	Last	night	for



the	 first	 time	 I	 joined	 him	 and	 some	 10	 of	 his	 entourage	 on	 their
evening	 walk.	 A	 great	 deal	 could	 be	 said	 about	 it,	 but	 I	 have	 just
written	about	it	at	length	to	Max	who	had	informed	me	of	the	Rabbi’s
presence	 here.17—And	 you,	 my	 most	 distinguished	 visitor	 to
Marienbad,	how	are	you?	No	news	as	yet,	content	myself	with	what
the	 familiar	 walks	 tell	 me—today,	 for	 instance,	 the	 promenade	 of
sulks	and	secrets.

Franz

[POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Marienbad,	July	19,	1916]
[Written	on	the	evening	of	July	18,	1916]

My	dearest—while	our	old	friends	appear	to	have	departed	with	you
(did	 that	 delightful	 Kosteletz	 really	 exist?),	 new	 guests	 arrive,	 and
yesterday	 on	 my	 way	 back	 from	 the	 Waldquelle	 they	 gave	 me
something	 of	 a	 fright;	 for	 a	 moment	 I	 was	 quite	 stunned.	 Strolling
along	 in	 comfortable	 Kosteletz-fashion—no	 hope	 of	 avoiding	 him—
who	should	come	toward	me	but	my	director,	not	the	one	you	know
by	 his	 cough,	 but	 his	 superior	 with	 whom	 I	 am	 on	 good	 terms,
followed	 by	 his	wife	 and	 daughter.	What	 a	 sight	 I	must	 have	 been!
There	was	no	need	 to	complain	about	my	headache,	which	 in	 fact	 I
had,	no	need	to	point	out	 that	 it	was	vital	 for	me	to	spend	my	time
alone	in	the	woods—the	sight	of	me	was	enough;	I	was	surrounded	by
a	trinity	of	compassion.	Though	I	spent	an	hour	with	them,	no	future
meeting	was	arranged.	So	once	more	I	am	alone;	also	without	news,
alas.

Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Marienbad,	July	19,	1916]

Dearest	 Felice—am	 continually	 tormented	 by	 bad	 nights	 and
headaches,	and	it	worries	me.	Am	not	aware	of	an	immediate	cause,
am	 calm	 and	 happy	 with	 regard	 to	 you.	 Is	 it	 because	 I	 have	 been
dissipating	my	energies	 these	 last	 four	years?	 Is	 this	 the	retribution?
Or	perhaps	it	is	merely	the	temporary	effect	of	country	air,	which,	by
the	way,	gives	me	a	huge	appetite.	Send	me	a	comforting	word.	My
state	 of	mind	won’t	 let	me	work,	 but	 that’s	 not	 the	worst;	 anyway,
what	could	I	have	produced	suddenly	in	these	8	days;	nor	is	this	my



time	for	work.	But	what	is	going	to	happen?—The	invitation18	to	you
has	been	dispatched,	I	wonder	how	you	will	deal	with	it	and	when.—
On	 a	 typewritten	 postcard	 my	 father	 asks	 me	 to	 send	 you	 his
greetings.	I	add	them	to	mine	and	overwhelm	you	with	the	lot.

Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Marienbad,]	July	20,	[1916]

Dearest	Felice—this	time	a	genuine	Frau	Elster19	has	robbed	me	of	an
afternoon	 with	 you.—Slept	 rather	 better	 today,	 hence	 feel	 a	 little
easier,	though	no	sleep	after	lunch.	Last	night	(it	was	warm	enough	to
sit	on	the	balcony)	I	began	to	like	my	room.	Today	a	new	couple	with
some	boys	moved	in	next	door	(oh,	for	the	dear	old	married	couple!);
the	boys	must	be	very	adroit	and	lively,	they	have	been	hammering	at
a	nail	or	something	for	the	last	5	minutes.—Despite	insomnia	and	my
aching	head	I	am	getting	fat,	not	as	fat	as	my	director,	but	in	my	own
subordinate	proportion.	Yesterday’s	menu:	at	10:30—2	milk,	honey,	2
butter,	 2	 rolls;	 11:00—¼	 kilo	 of	 cherries;	 12	 noon—beef,	 spinach,
potatoes,	 vanilla	 dumplings,	 roll;	 3:00—cup	 of	milk,	 2	 rolls;	 5:00—
chocolate,	 2	 butter,	 2	 rolls;	 7:00—vegetables,	 salad,	 bread,
Emmentaler	cheese;	9:00—2	slices	of	cake,	milk.	Well?

Franz

[POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Marienbad,	July	21,	1916]
July	20

Dearest	Felice,	very	special	thanks	for	Tuesday’s	 letter;	 in	addition,	I
have	had	three	postcards	as	well	in	the	last	few	days.	Your	influence
over	me,	Felice,	is	great	and	good,	and	on	the	strength	of	the	days	we
have	 spent	 together—despite	 the	 minor	 intermittent	 eclipses—I
believe	you	will	make	excellent	use	of	it.	May	it	be	the	same	for	me
with	regard	to	you!	There	is	a	great	deal	to	do,	more	for	me	than	for
you;	 even	 so,	 a	 great	 deal	 for	 both.	 It	 would	 be	 premature	 for	 my
headaches	to	put	an	end	to	my	strength	now.	It	would	be	good	if	we
could	meet	again	soon.—I	am	sitting	in	the	Dianahof,	it’s	raining,	I	am
unable	to	leave.	I	am	slightly,	but	only	slightly,	melancholy	and	aware
of	my	desire	 to	watch	 someone	at	needlework,	but	not	 the	kind	 the
little	 girl	 is	 doing	 at	 the	 next	 table.	 And	 yet	 I	 am	 still	 thoroughly



opposed	to	any	kind	of	needlework.
Best	regards,	Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Marienbad,]	July	21,	[1916]

Dearest—a	little	better	again,	not	unbroken	sleep,	but	dream-sleep	at
least	ten	times	over;	nevertheless	sleep,	and	head	improved.	If	only	I
could	stay	on	here,	adding	an	“improved”	each	day,	then	finally	come
straight	from	here	to	you,	that	would	indeed	be	a	blessed	way	of	life.
Not	feasible,	for	I	spend	too	much	on	food	here,	the	menu	I	mentioned
is	repeated	daily	in	ludicrous	fashion.—Needless	to	say	I	wrote	to	Max
long	 ago,	 am	 most	 anxious	 to	 hear	 what	 you	 think	 of	 the	 Jewish
Home,	and	in	what	way	you	can	help.—I	have	not	been	to	see	Felix.
His	first	postcard	from	Karlsbad	begins:	“It’s	cold,	foggy,	it’s	raining,	I
am	freezing,	Papa	is	 freezing,	my	wife	is	 freezing.	It’s	expensive,	the
bread	is	bad,	the	air	is	biting.	I	haven’t	got	boils.	My	wife	has	a	sore
throat,	etc.”	As	you	see,	life	isn’t	easy	there,	either.	Let’s	hope	he	can
last	out	his	cure!

Franz

[POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Marienbad,	July	22,	1916]

Dearest—am	 I	 overdoing	 the	 writing	 again,	 as	 in	 former	 days?	 In
justification:	 I	am	sitting	on	your	balcony,	on	your	side	of	 the	 table,
it’s	 as	 though	 the	 2	 sides	 of	 the	 table	were	 the	 2	 sides	 of	 a	 pair	 of
scales;	 as	 though	 the	 balance	 established	 on	 our	 good	 evenings	 had
been	upset;	and	I,	alone	on	one	side	of	the	scales,	were	going	down.
Going	down,	because	you	are	far	away.	That’s	why	I	am	writing.	Also
because	my	head	is	still	buzzing	despite	the	improvement	of	the	past
2	days—so,	with	my	writing	hand	at	 least,	 I	 try	to	reach	out	 for	the
peace	 I	 find	 with	 you.	 The	 silence	 here	 at	 present	 is	 almost	 as
complete	as	I	desire:	 the	nightlight	glowing	on	the	balcony	table,	all
other	balconies	deserted	owing	to	the	cold,	no	sound	except	a	steady
murmur	from	Kaiserstrasse	which	doesn’t	disturb	me.
Farewell	and	sleep	a	thousand	times	more	soundly	than

your	Franz



[POSTCARD]
[Marienbad,]	July	22,	[1916]

Dearest	Felice,	needless	to	say	one	cannot	foretell	how	a	postcard	will
be	 received	by	 its	 recipient,	 I,	 alas,	 least	 of	 all—still,	 I	 have	had	no
news	 for	2	days	(one	was	so	spoiled	by	being	 together,	 two	steps	 to
the	left	and	there	was	news	for	the	asking).	Felix	plus	wife,	brother,20
and	 father	 are	 here	 today;	 I	 keep	 running	 back	 home	 for	 each	mail
and	eventually	find	your	dear,	though	grumpy,	rather	grumpy,	though
kissable	postcard.	No	doubt,	in	a	strange	apartment	one	cannot	expect
to	be	undisturbed,	but	why	try	 to	stop	me	complaining	on	your	 lap,
why	not	accept	 it	 as	 the	act	of	devotion	 it	 is?	And	Liselotte?	 I	have
read	that	passage	many	times,	and	am	still	afraid	of	making	a	fool	of
myself	if	I	were	to	take	it	seriously.	Do	you	really	think	me	capable	of
such	 bad	 taste	 as	 to—I	won’t	 say	 engage	 in—but	 boast	 about—that
kind	of	thing?
It	is	the	plump	little	3-year-old	girl,	who	once	made	us	laugh	at	the

Dianahof.	 She	 was	 given	 a	 rose,	 and	 that’s	 what	 it	 was	 all	 about.
Dearest	Felice!

Franz

[POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Marienbad,	July	23,	1916]

At	 our	 old	 familiar	 Egerländer.21	 So,	 as	 you	 see,	 after	 those	 many
invitations	we	have	finally	met,	too	late	for	you.

Kindest	regards,	Franz

Am	asked	to	convey	regards	from	Baum	and	his	wife.

Kind	regards	from	Irma	Weltsch

So	we	are	here,	after	all,	but,	alas,	too	late.	All	that	is	left	is	the
balcony.	All	the	more	sincere	our	good	wishes

Felix	Weltsch
Best	wishes	from	Weltsch	Senior

Paul	Weltsch



[POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Marienbad,	July	24,	1916]

Again	 and	 still	 at	 the	 Egerländer.	 Visitors	 upon	 visitors;	 as	 you	 see,
people	 are	 trying	 to	 console	 me.	 Everyone	 is	 kind	 to	 me;	 even
Kosteletz’s	friend,	two	tables	away,	is	smiling	amiably	in	my	direction,
evidently	trying,	without	realizing	it,	to	direct	me	to	remember	him	to
you.

Franz

My	best	wishes	to	you	and	all	your	dear	ones
yours,	Julie	Kafka

If	only	I	were	Kosteletz—22	and	he	were	bellowing	in	my	ear!
Thank	you	for	your	good	wishes,	I	return	them	affectionately.

Yours,	Valy

[POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Prague,	July	25,	1916]

My	 poor	 dearest	 (poor,	 because	 we	 are	 all	 poor	 creatures,	 and
because,	when	incapable	of	helping,	one	pats	the	poor	one’s	cheeks),
back	 at	 the	 office,	 in	 the	 dregs	 of	 despair.	 Waiting	 for	 me,	 among
other	 things,	 a	 letter	 from	 the	publisher	 [Kurt	Wolff]	 in	which—no,
they	don’t	make	sense	just	now,	but	things	that	2–3	years	ago	might
well	have	made	marvelous	sense.23—Writing	to	you	from	the	balcony
was	intended	to	be	my	last	act	in	Marienbad,	but	there	was	only	time
to	take	one	quick	look,	and	swallow	½	kilo	of	cherries.	The	last	night,
by	 the	 way,	 was	 the	 best,	 nearly	 6	 hours	 (to	 my	 knowledge)	 of
uninterrupted	 sleep,	 an	 unprecedented	 feat	 for	 my	 nerves.	 (I	 am
constantly	being	interrupted	by	people	standing	around	my	desk.)	But
more	things	assault	my	head	here	than	there,	I	don’t	know	how	it	will
go	on.	No	doubt	 it	 is	 good	 that	we	 cling	 to	 each	other.—Surely	 the
Stoker	 can’t	 be	 out	 of	 print;	 it	 arrived	 in	Marienbad,	 though	 rather
late.	 I	 shall	mail	 it.	About	Erdmuthe	presently,	 the	book	 is	 important
enough	for	us.	The	Jewish	Home?	Kindest	regards	and	pray	accept	my
one	eternal	kiss.

Franz



[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	July	26,	1916

My	 dearest,	 it’s	 a	 good	 thing	 that	 some	 of	 my	 postcards	 arrive
together;	 they	 can	 then	 balance	 each	 other,	 since	 at	 the	 time	 of
writing	 I	 find	 it	 hard	 to	 control	 myself.—You	 are	 mistaken	 in
imagining	that	 I	am	satisfied	with	your	 life	 if	you	go	without	 lunch.
On	 the	 contrary,	 it	 is	 a	 very	 bad	 arrangement	 in	 which	 I	 shall	 not
acquiesce	 until	 you	 send	 me	 an	 exact	 report	 of	 your	 daily	 menu.
Surely	 there	 must	 be	 an	 establishment	 in	 the	 neighborhood	 that
produces	something	edible.	In	any	case,	let	me	know.	The	idea	of	your
living	 all	 day	 on	 cocoa	 and	 a	 roll	 (without	 even	 so	 much	 as
Fletcherizing24)	makes	me	almost	melancholy,	especially	in	view	of	the
vast	amount	of	work	you	do.—I	won’t	send	you	the	story25	just	now,
it’s	too	complicated,	it	is	yours	just	the	same,	even	if	it	remains	here
with	me.—Must	you	really	go	to	the	factory	yourself?	Couldn’t	one	of
them	come	over	at	certain	times	to	inquire?

Best	regards,	Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	July	27,	[1916]

Dearest—after	 a	 morning’s	 work.	 The	 only	 real	 knowledge	 I	 still
retain	 in	 my	 head	 is	 that	 my	 room	 at	 the	 office	 and	 the	 woods	 in
Marienbad	 simply	 cannot	 be	 compared.—Why	 the	 expansion	 of	 the
factory?	 Is	 it	 a	major	 one?	 Is	 it	 being	 done	 in	 connection	with	 the
patent?	Does	it	mean	a	lot	of	extra	work	for	you?—You	ask	about	my
director:	no,	 I	didn’t	speak	to	him	again,	 though	I	did	catch	sight	of
the	entire	family	on	several	occasions;	each	time,	however,	I	ran	away
like	a	schoolboy,	once	at	a	distance	of	no	more	than	5	paces.	But	on
my	last	day	I	sent	his	wife	5	tree-size	roses,	and	wrote,	among	other
things,	 that	 “my	 irksome	 (a	 useful,	 indefinite	 word)	 condition	 had
deprived	me	of	the	honor	and	pleasure	of	delivering	them	in	person,
etc.”	Not	bad,	 eh?	And	not	 altogether	untrue.—I	 send	you	greetings
and	kiss	your	hand	to	fortify	those	lips	exhausted	by	dictation.

Franz

[IN	THE	LOWER	MARGIN]	Jewish	People’s	Home?



[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	July	28,	1916

My	 dearest—somehow,	 4	 days	 after	 my	 return,	 I	 can	 still	 feel	 the
after-effects	of	 that	 inner	and	outer	calm	which,	with	your	help	and
that	of	 the	great	 forests,	was	granted	 to	me	 in	Marienbad.	They	are
beginning	 to	 wear	 off,	 the	 after-effects—headaches,	 nightmares,	 the
usual	restless	nights	are	once	again	coming	to	the	fore;	nevertheless	I
have	gained	a	certain	confidence	that	a	little	traveling	and	much	rest
and	 freedom	may	 yet	 help	 to	 mend	 my	 disintegrating	 head.	 But	 it
would	 have	 to	 be	 soon.	 As	 far	 as	 my	 office	 existence	 goes,	 the
consequences	 of	 my	 gaining	 strength	 are	 invariably	 bad—renewed
and	 greater	 rebellion,	 followed	 by	 an	 even	 more	 drastic	 relapse.	 I
should	 like	to	know	what	Marienbad	has	done	for	you,	and	whether
and	how	your	present	life	differs,	for	better	or	worse,	from	the	past.

Best	regards,	Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	July	29,	[1916]

My	dearest—well,	 that’s	a	 fine	state	of	affairs:	 the	factory	expanded,
and	you	are	alone.	When	you	have	extra	work,	I	have	extra	work,	too.
With	this	in	mind,	I	really	don’t	know	how	one	is	going	to	cope	with
life	 in	 Karlshorst.26	 The	 one	 consolation	 is	 that	 it	 is	 not	 in	 fact
additional	work	 (apart	 from	 the	 reports	 for	 your	 chief),	 but	merely
additional	responsibility,	which	indeed	is	bad	enough.	But	write	and
tell	me	what	kind	of	additional	work	it	entails,	and	what	it	means	in
the	 way	 of	 time.	 What	 depresses	 me	 is	 that	 you	 are	 increasingly
engulfed	by	your	job.	Are	you	working	for	Lindström	as	well?	(What
was	the	result	of	the	disagreement	about	pay?)	In	view	of	all	this,	you
certainly	 won’t	 have	 much	 time	 for	 the	 Home,	 and	 I	 am	 positively
voracious	for	news	of	your	participation.	What	matters	to	me	(as	it	will
to	you)	is	not	so	much	Zionism	as	the	thing	in	itself,	and	what	it	may
lead	to.

Kindest	regards,	Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	July	30,	[1916]



Dearest—I	am	re-reading	yesterday’s	postcard.	What	are	you	going	to
say	to	Dr.	Lehmann?27	In	any	case,	put	yourself	at	his	disposal.	With
the	 exception	 of	walking	 and	 gymnastics,	 there	 is	 no	 better	way	 of
spending	the	little	free	time	you	have	than	with	him;	it	is	a	hundred
times	 more	 important	 than	 the	 theater,	 than	 Klabund,	 Gerson,28	 or
whoever	 else	 there	 may	 be.	 Besides,	 it	 is	 one	 of	 the	 most	 self-
interested	of	occupations.	One	is	not	helping,	but	seeking	help;	more
honey	can	be	gathered	from	these	exertions	than	from	all	the	flowers
in	all	the	Marienbad	woods.	I	don’t	know	how	you	got	the	idea	that
only	 students	 are	wanted.	 Needless	 to	 say,	 it	 was	 students	 (of	 both
sexes)—commonly	 the	 least	 selfish,	 most	 determined,	 most	 restless
and	 exacting,	 keenest,	most	 independent	 and	 farsighted	 of	 people—
who	 started	 the	venture	and	 run	 it;	 but	 everyone	alive	has	as	much
right	to	be	part	of	it.

Kindest	regards,	Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	July	31,	[1916]

Dearest—several	days	now	without	news	(I	choose	 to	say	several,	 in
fact	it’s	only	three).	What	with	all	the	work	now	being	heaped	upon
you,	I	am	uneasy	if	without	news	for	any	length	of	time.	As	a	matter
of	fact,	my	headache	produces	much	the	same	result	(I	rarely	sleep	for
more	than	an	hour,	go	back	to	sleep,	but	again	for	no	longer);	a	cool
calm	head	sees	things	differently	from	a	burning	aching	one.	Horrible,
horrible,	above	all	on	a	beautiful	day.	Yesterday,	Sunday	(I	stayed	in
bed	until	12:30),	was	tolerable,	and	I	spent	the	afternoon	pleasantly—
alone,	 walking,	 lying	 in	 the	 grass,	 drinking	 milk,	 and	 reading
(Lublinski,	The	 Origins	 of	 Judaism29).	 And	 you?	 By	 the	way,	 do	 you
realize	 that	 “wait,	 and	 soon”	etc.30	 is	 not	 in	 fact	 a	benediction,	 and
even	 if	 it	 were,	 the	 “soon”	 is	 indeed	 questionable,	 or	 rather	 hardly
questionable.

Regards,	Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	August	1,	[1916]

Dearest—no	 news	 for	 four	 days,	 it	 is	 almost	 a	 little	 sinister,	with	 a
Sunday	in	between.	I	have	found	a	new	enjoyment	for	my	free	time:



lying	in	the	grass.	When	there	is	neither	time	enough	nor	inclination
to	 venture	 out	 of	 town	 (for	 after	 all,	 it	 is	 quite	 lovely	 in	 the
neighborhood	of	Prague,	or	so	it	seemed	to	me	on	Sunday),	I	lie	down
in	the	playgrounds	where	the	poor	sit	with	their	children.	It’s	not	too
noisy	there,	far	quieter	than	at	the	Kreuzbrunn	[in	Marienbad].	While
lying	there	the	other	day,	almost	in	the	ditch	(this	year,	however,	the
grass	 is	 tall	 and	 thick,	 even	 in	 the	 ditch),	 a	 rather	 distinguished
gentleman,	with	whom	occasionally	I	have	official	dealings,	passed	by
in	a	carriage-and-pair	on	his	way	to	an	even	more	distinguished	party.
I	stretched	myself	and	experienced	the	joys	(though	only	the	joys)	of
being	déclassé.	But	you?	You	were	with	me	on	Sunday,	so	very	much
alive,	and	now	there	is	silence.

Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	August	2,	[1916]

Dearest—now	 the	 5th	 day	without	 news,	 I	 don’t	want	 to	 think	 that
you	are	not	writing,	nor	do	I	want	to	think	of	illness	or	something	of
that	 kind,	 yet	 it	 is	 all	 rather	dismal,	 and	my	writing	 loses	 its	 point.
Yesterday	I	sent	you	an	issue	of	the	Jüdische	Rundschau;	Max’s	article
shows	what	he	has	been	working	on;	the	quotations	from	letters	show
the	kind	of	girls	involved;	the	feuilleton	(not	very	well	written)	shows
a	 strange	 Zionist	 atmosphere.31	 Anyway,	 you	 need	 have	 no	 qualms
about	 the	Jewish	Home	as	 regards	Zionism,	with	which	you	are	not
sufficiently	 familiar.	 Through	 the	 Jewish	 Home	 other	 forces,	 much
nearer	 to	 my	 heart,	 are	 set	 in	 motion	 and	 take	 effect.	 Zionism,
accessible	to	most	Jews	of	today,	at	least	in	its	outer	fringes,	is	but	an
entrance	 to	 something	 far	 more	 important.	 What’s	 the	 good	 of
writing?	You	are	silent.

Regards,	Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	August	3,	[1916]

Dear	 Felice—there	 was	 practically	 nothing	 about	 yourself	 in	 your
postcard	 of	 August	 1st	 which	 I	 had	 been	 looking	 forward	 to	 for	 a
whole	 week.	 And	my	 longing,	 after	 all,	 is	 for	 news	 of	 you,	 not	 for
news	 about	 the	 little	 coat	 (the	 loss	 of	which,	 by	 the	way,	 shouldn’t



make	you	so	“terribly	annoyed.”	Let	me	have	the	necessary	particulars
to	buy	one,	as	well	as	your	sister’s	address,	and	I	will	send	her	a	little
coat).	 I	 know	 you	 are	 extremely	 busy;	 but	 instead	 of	 the	 10	 lines
about	the	coat,	I	wish	you	had	written	10	lines	about	your	work,	your
food,	your	state	of	health,	giving	me	the	feeling	that	you	long	to	come
closer	 across	 this	 distance	 which,	 thanks	 to	 the	 new	 passport
regulations,	 has	 become	 virtually	 endless!	 What’s	 the	 good	 of
complaining	and	writing!	Let	us	return	to	writing	every	two	weeks	as
before.

Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	August	5,	[1916]

Dearest—long	 live	 the	 girl	who	 is	 going	 to	help	 you!	What	 came	of
the	 undertaking	 you	 entered	 into	with	 regard	 to	 your	 job?	Good	 or
bad?	What	do	you	mean	by	saying	you	will	go	out	 to	 lunch?	Where
to?—And	Dr.	 Lehmann?	On	 July	 26th	 you	 said:	 “In	 any	 case	 I	will
write	 to	Dr.	L.	 tomorrow.”	On	August	1st:	“Some	day	 I	will	write	 to
Dr.	L.”	And	now,	on	the	2nd:	“I	will	set	about	it	very	energetically.”
All	 in	 all	 this	 sounds	 like	 a	 lot,	 but	 hardly	 suggests	 an	 increase	 in
activity.	Anyway,	I	don’t	even	know	what	you	mean	to	write	to	him;
surely	 the	 simplest	would	 be	 to	 go	 there	 one	 day;	 after	 all,	 it	 is	 in
Charlottenburg,	so	probably	not	very	far.32	Now,	during	the	summer,
there	 probably	 won’t	 be	 too	 many	 evening	 functions.—What	 else?
What	are	you	reading?	How	about	your	Sundays?	How	is	 it	you	can
go	to	see	the	painter33	on	a	Friday?	You	have	been	to	Karlshorst?

Kindest	regards,	Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	August	7,	1916

Dearest—better	this	way	than	the	other,	better	for	us	to	fail	to	draw
close	by	means	of	the	written	word	(I	feel	a	lack	of	something	in	your
recent	 postcards;	 they	 are	 like	 reports	 reduced	 to	 formulas;	 partly
written	with	 reluctance;	 the	 inordinate	amount	of	work	you	do	may
well	 be	 largely	 responsible),	 better	 this	 way,	 I	 say,	 than	 failing	 to
communicate	 by	word	 of	mouth.	 Hitherto,	 in	 this	 respect,	 we	 were
under	some	fundamental	misapprehension	which	Marienbad	rectified.



Whenever	you	used	to	try	to	shift	everything	from	the	written	to	the
spoken	 word,	 I	 imagined	 it	 was	 an	 evasion;	 but	 now	 I	 believe	 you
were	right.	We	will	curtail	our	writing	to	the	point	where	it	does	not
interfere	with	your	work	nor	 (and	 this	 too	 is	 important	 to	me)	your
work	with	your	writing,	forcing	you	to	write	ten	cold,	hastily	thought
up,	 absentminded	 lines,	 instead	 of	 one	 good,	 lively,	 felicitous	 one.
This	is	not	a	reproach.

Franz

[POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Prague,	August	8,	1916]
August	7,	on	the	stroke	of	11

Dear	Felice,	 this	evening	while	 thinking	of	you	and	feeling	happy	at
being	 free	 to	do	 so,	 in	 contrast	 to	 the	days	before	Marienbad,	 there
came	 to	 my	 mind	 among	 other	 things	 a	 certain	 passage	 from
Erdmuthe.	 Not	 the	 one	 that	 I	 believe	 gives	 the	 book	 a	 special
importance	for	us,	in	this	respect	it	is	not	passages	that	are	important,
but	 the	 whole	 book;	 the	 passage	 I	 have	 in	 mind	 is	 so	 obtrusively
didactic	that	I	feel	bound	to	quote	it.	On	arriving	after	her	wedding	at
her	new	flat	in	Dresden,	which	her	Grandmother	Zinzendorf	had	had
furnished	 for	 the	 young	 couple	 in	 what	 was	 then	 considered	 an
affluent	manner,	the	Countess,	aged	22,	burst	into	tears.	“It	comforts
me	 to	 think,”	 she	writes,	 “that	God	 is	 aware	 that	we	 are	not	 in	 the
least	 responsible	 for	all	 this	 frivolity.	May	He	grant	me	 the	grace	 to
prove	myself	 His	 true	 child	 in	 other	 respects,	 for	 in	 this	 one	 I	 was
unable	to	act	as	I	wished.	May	He	keep	my	soul	steadfast,	and	avert
my	eyes	from	all	the	follies	of	this	world.”34
To	be	cut	in	stone	and	set	in	place	above	the	furniture	store.

Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	August	9,	[1916]

My	dearest,	beautiful,	beautiful	days.	Whenever	 I	have	the	 time,	 the
inclination,	and	the	strength,	I	leave	the	city,	not	just	to	lie	in	ditches.
Up	on	a	high	roadbank	near	here,	behind	an	orchard,	there	is	a	little
wood	at	 the	 edge	of	which	 I	 like	 to	 lie.	To	 the	 left	 one	 can	 see	 the
river,	and	beyond	some	sparsely	wooded	heights,	directly	opposite	a
solitary	 hill	 with	 an	 old	 house—mysterious	 to	 me	 ever	 since	 my



childhood—delicately	merging	into	the	landscape,	and	all	around	me
peaceful	undulating	country.	And	then	the	evening	sun	shines	straight
onto	my	face	and	chest.—My	mother	and	Vally	(whom	no	doubt	you
mean	 when	 you	 say	 Ottla)	 arrived	 yesterday;	 my	 brother-in-law	 is
home	 on	 leave.—I	 don’t	 know	 Telschow.—My	 writing	 is	 a	 matter
neither	of	 economy	nor	extravagance.—Kindest	 regards	 to	Frl.	Grete
[Bloch].	What	does	she	think	of	the	Home?

Franz

Franz	Kafka’s	mother	to	Felice	Bauer’s	mother
Prague,	August	9,	1916

My	dear	Anna,
It	is	already	more	than	two	years	since	we	last	wrote	to	each	other,

and	 what	 haven’t	 we	 lived	 through	 in	 all	 that	 time!	 Painful	 events
have	 outnumbered	 the	 happy	 ones.	 Now	 let	 us	 hope	 that	 fate	 will
allow	 us	 to	 experience	many	 joys	 through	 our	 children’s	 happiness,
and	thereby	amply	compensate	us	for	all	the	sorrows.
I	 meant	 to	 write	 to	 you	 before	 leaving	 Franzensbad,	 but	 found

neither	peace	nor	time	to	do	so.	What	with	doing	the	cure	all	day	and
keeping	up	an	extensive	correspondence	with	one’s	 family,	each	day
was	too	short.	Well,	on	Monday	7th	at	4	P.M.	 I	 left	 in	great	haste	for
Prague,	accompanied	by	Vally;	we	arrived	at	10	P.M.	and	all	our	dear
ones,	 including	Peppo,	were	 at	 the	 station	 to	meet	 us.	We	 curtailed
our	cure	by	two	days	because	quite	unexpectedly	our	Peppo	was	given
a	 fortnight’s	 leave,	 and	had	 sent	 us	 a	 telegram	on	Monday.	 Perhaps
the	happy	excitement	will	help	to	rid	Vally	of	her	headache	which	the
cure	at	Franzensbad	failed	to	do.	The	doctor	promised	results	within
6–8	weeks	after	the	cure:	well,	one	can	but	hope!
Now	 to	 our	 other	 problem-children.	You	 can	 imagine	my	 surprise

when	I	received	a	postcard	from	Franz	in	Marienbad	with	good	wishes
from	Felice	 in	her	 own	hand.	Although	 I	 had	 always	 suspected	 that
their	 friendship	 had	 not	 come	 to	 an	 end,	 her	 good	 wishes,
nevertheless,	were	a	pleasant	surprise,	and	when	they	came	to	see	us
in	Franzensbad	we	took	great	pleasure	in	her	company.	I	could	see	the
harmony	of	souls	in	the	eyes	of	both,	and	so	I	hope	that	after	the	war
they	will	 find	 their	mutual	happiness.	My	dear	husband	 is	 also	very
pleased	to	welcome	our	Felice	as	his	daughter.	I	am	very	active	again
in	the	shop,	since	almost	the	entire	male	staff	has	been	called	up,	and



as	a	result	I	feel	almost	better	than	I	did	in	Franzensbad.	When	one	is
accustomed	 to	 hard	work,	 it	 is	 difficult	 to	 grow	 accustomed	 to	 rest
and	idleness.
And	now	farewell,	 let	me	hear	 from	you	soon,	give	my	regards	 to

all	your	children,	especially	to	Felice,	and	accept	all	good	wishes	from
yours,	Julie	Kafka

My	husband	and	children	join	me	in	sending	their	kindest	regards.

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	August	10,	[1916]

My	dearest—what	are	the	reproaches	your	mother	levels	against	you,
headache-making	 reproaches	 at	 that?	 There	 should	 be	 peace	 now,
from	 that	 quarter	 anyway.	Write	 and	 tell	me	 about	 it.—One	 cannot
say	 that	you	had	an	amusing	Sunday.	Why,	on	 these	 few	 remaining
summer	Sundays,	don’t	you	go	off	 into	the	country	first	 thing	in	the
morning?	I	careered	around	with	Ottla	(whom	an	official	we	met	took
for	my	bride)	and	ended	up	with	sour	milk	in	a	garden.—You	say	you
had	just	come	back	from	lunch;	where	was	that?	Did	the	girl	assistant,
who	should	have	arrived	on	Saturday,	turn	up	on	Monday?—Difficult
to	advise	you	what	to	read.	Apropos	the	Home,	 I	suggest	you	return
again	 to	 the	Memoirs35	 I	once	sent	you.—“She	 lets	her	work	drop	 in
her	lap	…	most	flattering	…”	but	supposing	she	started	choosing	fresh
colors	at	the	critical	moment?

Kindest	regards,	Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	August	12,	[1916]

My	dearest—the	 letter	 to	Dr.	 L.	 is	 very	 good,	 exactly	what	 I	 had	 in
mind.	But	I	couldn’t	have	known	that	you	had	written	it.	Moreover,	I
confused	 the	 address	 with	 that	 of	 the	 Settlement	 Home;	 that	 is	 in
Charlottenburg.—Your	 excursion	 to	 Friedrichshagen	 is	 highly
approved	of	here;	couldn’t	 this	kind	of	 thing	be	repeated?	The	other
day	 I	 took	 Felix	 and	 his	 wife	 to	 the	 little	 wood—described	 before,
most	inadequately—and	received	great	approbation.	It	is	an	infinitely
peaceful	 spot,	 where	 you	 are	 very	 much	 alive	 to	 me.—Otherwise,



everything	 is	 pretty	 dismal;	 recently	 the	 headaches	 left	 me	 for	 3–4
days,	 allowing	 me	 to	 see	 things	 more	 rationally	 for	 once;	 but
yesterday	it	was	bad,	and	today	not	much	better.	And	on	this	note	I
grow	silent	on	your	dear	hand.

Franz

[TWO	POSTCARDS]
[Prague,]	August	13,	[1916]

Dearest,	 reading	 incontestable	 matters	 such	 as	 these,	 one	 becomes
more	 and	 more	 confused:	 In	 1876	 Fontane	 accepted	 a	 civil	 service
appointment	as	Secretary	of	the	Royal	Academy	of	Arts,	and	resigned
from	 it	 at	 the	 end	 of	 3½	 months	 amid	 appalling	 quarrels	 with	 his
wife.	To	a	woman	friend	he	writes:	“The	whole	world	condemns	me,
thinks	me	childish,	crazy,	high-handed.	I	am	forced	to	put	up	with	it.	I
have	ceased	to	discuss	it,	etc.”	Later:	“I	have	held	this	appointment	for
3½	 months.	 During	 the	 entire	 time	 I	 have	 derived	 not	 a	 single
moment	 of	 enjoyment,	 experienced	 not	 a	 single	 pleasant	 sensation.
The	job	is	as	distasteful	to	me	from	the	personal	as	from	the	practical
point	 of	 view.	 Everything	 galls	 me;	 everything	 stultifies	 me;
everything	nauseates	me.	I	have	the	distinct	feeling	that	I	shall	always
be	unhappy,	could	become	emotionally	disturbed	and	melancholy.”	“I
have	been	 through	dreadful	 times.	And	what	had	 to	happen,	had	 to
happen	quickly.	I	may	still	possess	sufficient	strength	and	elasticity	to
get	 things	 back	 to	 where	 they	 were	 the	 day	 this	 disastrous
appointment	was	offered	to	me.	Other	people’s	wisdom	helps	me	not
at	 all.	 Anything	 they	 can	 tell	 me	 I’ve	 told	 myself	 in	 100	 sleepless
hours.	 One	 day	 I	 shall	 have	 to	 atone	 for	 it	 and	 the	 leisurely	 days
(leisurely	despite	their	horror-content)	will	have	to	be	exchanged	for
those	 devoted	 to	work.”	 “One	 cannot	 strive	 against	 one’s	 innermost
nature,	and	 in	 the	heart	of	every	man	 lies	a	Something	 that,	once	 it
feels	 abhorrence,	 will	 not	 be	 pacified	 or	 overcome.	 I	 had	 to	 decide
whether	 to	 lead	 a	 dull	 life,	 devoid	 of	 light	 and	 joy,	 for	 the	 sake	 of
material	security,	or	etc.”36	So	today	it	was	Fontane	who	wrote	to	you
instead	of	me.

Kindest	regards,	Franz

[POSTCARD]



[Prague,]	August	14,	[1916]
Dearest—I	still	don’t	understand	the	purpose	of	 the	undertaking	you
entered	into.	So	there	was	no	advantage	in	it	from	your	point	of	view,
in	which	 case	 it	was	merely	 to	be	obliging	on	your	part.	Why	were
you	asked	 to	give	 it?	And	how	was	 it	 given?	And	what	would	have
happened	 if	 you	 hadn’t	 given	 it?—The	 bar	 of	 chocolate	 for	 lunch
depresses	me,	especially	as	 I	can	also	hear	 the	crunch	with	which	 it
disappeared.	 Or	 did	 the	 resolution	 to	 stop	 crunching	 include
chocolate?	The	rest	of	your	lunch	was	not	up	to	much,	either.	What	is
the	name	of	 the	 restaurant?	 I	 should	 like	 to	be	 able	 to	picture	 it	 in
some	way.	The	hand	that	ought	to	be	guiding	you	is	now	shaking	with
nerves.

Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	August	15,	1916

Dearest—about	your	anniversary	 letter37;	 to	 tell	 the	 truth,	 I	 actually
don’t	remember	the	date;	in	fact,	without	an	effort,	not	even	the	year.
Had	 I	 been	 asked	 to	 give	 it	 straight	 off	without	 assistance,	 I	would
have	said	 it	was	5	years	ago.	Needless	 to	say	 that	would	be	entirely
incorrect,	for	5	years	it	was	not,	it	was	either	4	years	or	4000.	On	the
other	hand	I	certainly	remember	all	other	details	far	more	accurately
than	you	do,	if	only	because	at	that	time	there	was	no	reason	for	you
to	 be	 so	 observant,	 isn’t	 that	 so?	 You	 also	 falsify	 historical	 facts	 by
saying	 that	 I	 did	 not	 accompany	 you	 to	 your	 hotel;	 I	 certainly	 did,
along	with	Herr	Director	Brod.	 I	 remember	every	detail.	 I	 still	know
the	precise	place	on	the	Graben	where	for	no	reason,	yet	deliberately
owing	 to	my	uneasiness,	desire,	and	helplessness,	 I	 stumbled	several
times	 off	 the	 sidewalk	 onto	 the	 street.	And	 then	 instead	 of	 ignoring
Herr	Brod	and	whispering	in	my	ear:	“Come	with	me	to	Berlin,	drop
everything	and	come!”	you	were	borne	aloft	in	the	elevator.

Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	August	16,	1916

Dearest—where,	 how,	 and	 whom	 did	 you	 consult	 on	 the	 subject?



Who,	where,	how,	and	what	information	did	you	obtain?	No,	no,	on	a
matter	as	 important	 to	me	as	 this,	you	will	have	 to	be	a	 little	more
specific.	 A	 pity	 it	 will	 take	 so	 long	 for	 me	 to	 get	 an	 account	 of
Thursday,	 I	 can	 hardly	 expect	 it	 before	 Monday.—I	 could	 not
immediately	 remember	 the	 table	 at	 the	 Café	 des	Westens;	 all	 I	 saw
was	the	smoke-filled	room	crowded	with	strangers	all	of	whom	knew
one	 another,	 and	 where	 once	 I	 had	 been,	 alone	 and	 filled	 with
sadness.	Only	 later	did	 I	 remember	 the	 lunch	with	you	and	Toni	on
the	veranda;	not	 that	 I	was	very	gay	on	 that	occasion,	 either.	But	4
years	 ago!	 What	 a	 charming,	 black-haired,	 strong-nerved,	 long-
sleeping,	 hardheaded	 (not	 metaphorically)	 young	 man	 I	 must	 have
been	 in	 those	days!	You	must	write	and	 tell	me	about	 it	 some	 time;
bathing	in	your	description	may	rejuvenate	me.

Kind	regards,	Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	August	17,	1916

Dearest,	 don’t	worry	me,	 or	 at	 least	 don’t	make	me	uneasy	 by	 such
vague	 allusions	 as	 are	 on	 Saturday’s	 postcard.	 What	 makes	 you
suddenly	think	of	Franzensbad38	and	the	last	evening?	What	is	it	that
keeps	going	through	your	head	on	that	account?	What	don’t	you	feel
quite	clear	about?	What	do	you	find	so	hard	to	put	on	paper?	(But	so
easy	 to	worry	 about.)	What	 is	 it	 that	 you	 could	 say	 so	much	more
about?	The	fact	that	you	were	compelled	to	hint	at	these	things	shows
that	it	would	be	important	to	speak	frankly.	I	beg	you	to	do	so.	I	can
admit	neither	considerations	nor	scruples.	Being	together,	one	can	be
silent;	true,	this	shortens	life,	but	then	life	on	average	is	long.	On	the
other	hand,	being	so	far	apart,	one	should	take	every	opportunity	to
speak	frankly.	For	today,	if	you	think	of	it,	each	of	us	is	on	an	island
from	which	 the	mailboat	puts	 to	 sea	but	once	a	year.	And	 then	you
choose	to	write	in	allusions?

Kind	regards,	Franz

[IN	 THE	MARGIN]	Please	write	“Pořič”	more	carefully;	 I	 feel	apprehensive
every	time	I	read	it.



[TWO	POSTCARDS]
[Prague,]	August	18,	[1916]

Dearest—no	news	yesterday;	“she”	had	no	time	or	inclination	to	write
to	 me	 on	 Tuesday,	 I	 thought;	 today,	 however,	 I	 get	 a	 letter	 and	 a
postcard,	very	good	and	kind.—I	am	absolutely	delighted	that	you	are
at	last	in	touch	with	the	Home.	Where	did	you	talk	to	the	lady?—The
documents.	 Well,	 that’s	 not	 easy.	 The	 birth	 certificate	 will	 be
particularly	hard	to	get.	Besides,	it	is	so	long	since	I	was	born.	I	keep
thinking	that	you	handed	my	papers	to	someone	in	Berlin	2	years	ago,
perhaps	to	the	Synagogue,	or	to	some	office,	I	don’t	know.	In	any	case
I	will	sec	to	it,	though	it	will	require	an	upsurge	of	energy.—We	both
see	 eye	 to	 eye	 about	 the	 interminable	 time,	 though	 I	 feel	 sure	 that
each	passing	minute	does	not	undermine	you	as	it	does	me.	However,
it	 is	 better	 that	 way.—Just	 one	 request:	 you	 know	 my	 cousin	 got
married.	For	a	wedding	present	 from	my	parents	he	has	asked	 for	a
painting.	I	have	written	to	an	artist	(of	whom	I	think	very	highly	and
whose	name	I	have	mentioned	once	before):	Fritz	Feigl,	Wilmersdorf,
Waghäuslerstrasse	6.	To	reduce	the	price	I—not	altogether	decently—
have	lied	by	saying	I	want	to	give	the	picture.	Now	he	writes	that	the
pictures	I	mentioned	are	in	Cologne,	and	that	he	doesn’t	know	which
one	of	his	Berlin	pictures	to	choose	for	me.	(At	the	same	time	he	asks
whether	200	kronen	might	not	be	too	much.	 It	 is	 too	much.)	Shall	 I
write	 and	 tell	 him	 to	 get	 in	 touch	with	 you,	 and	 that	 you	 (with	 an
unerring	eye	 for	 the	average	Jewish	wedding	present)	will	make	the
selection?	 This	 would	 give	 you	 an	 opportunity	 to	 see	 much	 that	 is
worth	seeing—him,	his	paintings,	his	wife,	and	his	apartment.

Kind	regards,	Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	August	19,	[1916]

Dearest—about	 the	 painter	 Feigl.	 I	 don’t	 want	 to	 keep	 him	waiting
until	 I	 get	 an	answer	 from	you.	So	 I	 am	offering	him	150	kronen	 (I
regard	the	whole	thing	not	as	a	purchase	but	a	favor;	it	would	still	be
a	favor	even	at	200	kronen,	though	a	more	expensive	one)	and	asking
him,	if	he	agrees,	to	get	in	touch	with	you	by	telephone	and	to	select
the	picture	with	your	help.	Nor	need	I	wait	for	your	answer,	for	if	by
any	chance	you	don’t	wish	to	be	bothered	with	it,	you	can	easily	tell



him	on	the	telephone	that	in	the	meantime	you	and	I	have	agreed	that
he	himself	should	select	a	picture.	So	you	do	as	you	please.

Franz

[TWO	POSTCARDS.	POSTMARK:	Prague,	August	20,	1916]
August	19,	1916

Dearest—no	news,	but	the	somewhat	capricious	mail	service	has	one
considerable	advantage:	in	a	case	of	this	kind	one	can	think	merely	in
terms	of	delay.—If	in	order	to	survive	the	present	moment	one	must
continually	 have	 some	 immediate	 pleasure,	 then	 mine	 consists	 of
knowing	that	you	have	begun	to	be	associated	with	the	Jewish	Home.
—I	have	been	meaning	 to	 comment	 for	 some	 time	on	what	you	 tell
me	 about	 your	mother:	 I	 understand	 both	 sides,	 not	 only	 that	 your
mother	wants	to	know	certain	things,	but	also	(and	this	I	understand
extremely	well,	more	so	than	you)	that	you	say	nothing.	But	surely	it
must	be	possible	to	reach	a	compromise.	There	is	not	all	that	much	to
tell	her—at	most	some	things	to	consider	jointly.	As	for	our	union,	it
is	certain,	as	certain	as	human	beings	can	be;	 the	exact	 time	 is	only
relatively	certain,	and	the	details	of	our	life	together	in	days	to	come
(excluding	 Prague)	 we	 must	 leave	 to	 the	 future.	 Surely	 this	 much
could	 be	 said	 even	 to	 your	mother,	 though	 for	me	 to	 say	 it	 would
require	a	tremendous	effort.	But	your	mother’s	concern	for	our	future
is	not	merely	 the	usual	maternal	one,	and	 this	 too	needs	discussion,
however	hazy	the	future	may	appear	at	present.—On	the	other	hand
your	mother’s	insistence	on	your	being	home	for	lunch	on	Sundays	is
quite	incomprehensible	to	me.	How	can	she	insist	upon	it	in	this	way,
especially	since	you	spend	many	evenings	with	your	mother,	and	it	is
only	a	question	of	these	few	Sundays	when	the	weather	is	fine.	If	you
don’t	furnish	me	with	a	satisfactory	reply,	I	shall	write	to	your	mother
personally	 on	 the	 subject.	 This	 sounds	 very	 cross,	 but	 it	 couldn’t	 be
less	so.

Kind	regards,	Franz

[THREE	POSTCARDS]
[Prague,]	August	21,	1916

Dearest,	what	you	foresaw	on	Thursday	morning	for	that	evening	was
not	 the	 Dragonerstrasse,39	 but	 Friedrichshagen.	 From	 the	 point	 of



view	 of	 health	 and	 scenic	 beauty,	 this	 was	 no	 doubt	 right,	 though
somewhat	 disappointing	 to	 me	 in	 view	 of	 the	 inquiries	 you	 were
supposed	to	have	made	on	Sunday	at	the	Café	des	Westens.	Evidently
the	 previous	 information	 you	 received	was	 invalidated	 by	Monday’s
information	from	Frau	Dr.	Zlocisti	(who	is	well	spoken	of	here.	What
was	your	 impression?).	 I	wanted	to	draw	your	attention	to	the	great
advantage	 you	 would	 have	 by	 being	 in	 an	 organization	 that	 is
growing,	yet	incomplete,	being	able	to	participate	from	the	beginning
in	 all	 the	mistakes	made	 and	 all	 the	 lessons	 learned.	 I	 greatly	 look
forward	 to	hearing	about	 it.—Fontane,	yes	 indeed!	You	must	not	do
his	 wife	 an	 injustice,	 no	 matter	 how	 wrong	 she	 was	 herself,	 and
frequently	at	that.	Although	I	did	mention	the	year,	 I	omitted	to	say
that	Fontane	was	57	years	old	at	the	time,	thus	entitled	to	lay	claim	to
certain	rights	even	though	they	were	in	conflict	with	the	claims	made
by	 a	 family	with—I	believe—5	 children.	He	was	 in	 the	 right,	 but	 it
was	 not	 a	 simple	 case.	 One	 more	 extract	 about	 his	 wife	 in	 that
connection:	“I	would	be	forced	to	call	her	demands	infinitely	unkind	if
I	did	not	assume	that	in	her	heart	she	had	reassured	herself	with	the
famous	platitude:	‘People	get	used	to	everything.’	This	theory	is	false.
I	 am	 as	 unsentimental	 as	 can	 be,	 yet	 it	 is	 undoubtedly	 true	 that
countless	people,	old	and	young,	have	their	hearts	broken	from	grief,
from	 yearning	 and	 mortification.	 Every	 day	 offers	 fresh	 proof	 that
people	 do	not	 in	 fact	 get	 used	 to	 everything.	 I	would	have	been	no
exception,	 and	 if	 compelled	 to	 endure	 I	 would	 have	 either	 grown
despondent,	or	undergone	a	sad	transformation	from	the	fresh	to	the
stale,	from	the	intellectually	alive	to	the	intellectually	dead.	That,	no
doubt,	is	what	is	called	‘getting	used	to	it,’	but	at	what	a	price!”40	All
this	is	said	more	casually,	more	flippantly	than	it	 is	meant,	and	may
even	 be	 meant	 more	 flippantly	 than	 in	 fact	 it	 is,	 because	 Fontane,
energetic	as	he	was,	simply	disregarded	it.	But	the	demands	he	made
upon	his	wife	to	understand	all	this	(I	mean	to	live	with	it)	were	too
severe,	in	my	opinion	it	was	impossible	for	her;	she,	of	course,	should
have	 trusted	 him,	 and	 trusting	 him	 should	 have	 kept	 silent,	 but	 if
throughout	their	 long	married	 life	she	had	not	 learned	(I	mean	trust
and	silence),	one	could	not	reasonably	expect	it	now.	Besides,	 in	the
absence	of	her	letters,	we	cannot	give	her	a	fair	trial.	But	enough	now.
I	hope	 for	news	again	 tomorrow;	 I	 snatch	at	your	postcards	 like	 the
little	mouse	at	 the	cheese	 in	the	trap,	where	to	my	horror	I	 found	it
today	in	the	office.



Kind	regards,	Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	August	22,	1916

Dearest,	find	myself	at	the	typewriter,	so	will	try	it	this	way	for	once.
My	 typist	 is	away	on	vacation,	and	at	 the	moment	 I	am	almost	 sick
with	longing	for	her,	since	her	male	substitute,	however	patient,	keen,
and	anxious	he	may	be	(from	time	to	time	I	heard	the	pounding	of	his
heart),	keeps	 tearing	at	my	nerves,	 though	he	doesn’t	know	it.	Well,
she	 is	 coming	 back	 tomorrow—no,	 the	 day	 after.	 How	 about	 your
assistant?	There	 is	no	mention	of	her.	A	sudden	 thought:	do	use	 the
typewriter	one	day,	too.	In	which	case	it	could	well	be	longer	than	say
last	 Sunday’s	 note	 (nothing	 so	 far	 dated	 either	 Friday	 or	 Saturday),
and	typescript	may	pass	through	the	censorship	at	greater	speed.—So
Sunday	at	the	office	as	well,	and	for	the	second	time,	very	bad.	What’s
gone	 wrong?	 And	 no	 further	 news	 about	 the	 Home,	 great	 pity.
Another	thought,	albeit	an	old	one	(they	come	upon	me	suddenly	at
the	typewriter):	Couldn’t	you	send	me	a	few	snapshots	of	yourself?	In
fact,	haven’t	you	already	promised	me	some?—Max	and	his	wife	are
off	to	Marienbad	today	with	my	recommendations	and	our	guidebook;
it	 is	 a	 pleasant	 feeling	 to	 have,	 as	 it	 were,	 a	 representative	 in
Marienbad	again.	 It	 is	 so	 far	 away	and	 so	 lost	 to	us	 (the	 typewriter
makes	one	tearful).	Kind	regards,	needless	to	say,	to	Frl.	Grete	as	well,
as	is	always	my	intention.

Franz

By	the	way,	did	you	read	the	Jüdische	Rundschau?

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	August	24,	1916

Very	pleased,	Felice,	I	am	very	pleased	with	you;	if	only	you	weren’t
too	far	away	for	me	to	show	you	properly	how	pleased	I	am!	I	hope
some	communication	 from	Dr.	Lehmann	will	arrive	 soon,	 it	 takes	 so
long.	About	your	plan,	which	 is	a	very	good	one:	Both	what	you	do
and	the	way	you	do	it	are	important;	the	latter	of	course	is	the	more
important,	 but	 the	 decisive	 factor,	 after	 all,	 is	 really	 what	 may
develop	 from	 it:	 that	 the	 potential	 strength	 and	 contacts	 within	 an



organization	of	 this	 kind	may	 come	alive	 for	 you.	 In	 any	 case	don’t
take	on	too	much	at	first,	both	in	consideration	of	yourself,	since	you
are	greatly	overworked,	and	of	 the	 thing	 itself,	of	which	you	should
first	acquire	an	overall	impression.

Franz

[IN	THE	MARGIN]	No	news	dated	either	Friday	or	Saturday,	lost?

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	August	25,	1916

Dearest,	 at	 a	 time	when	 punctuality	was	 still	 possible,	 one	was	 not
particularly	anxious	to	maintain	it,	so	now	one	ought	not	to	complain.
Yet	 complain	 one	 does	 on	 certain	 mornings.—Who	 is	 Fräulein
Schwabe	 whose	 name	 I	 don’t	 recall	 you	 mentioning?	 She	 does	 not
appear	 to	 have	 talked	 very	 kindly	 about	 the	 painter	 Feigl,	 provided
your	doubts	as	to	whether	it	would	be	worth	visiting	his	home	and	his
wife	 originated	 with	 her.	 In	 actual	 fact	 I	 know	 only	 him	 and	 his
paintings,	his	wife	very	slightly,	his	home	not	at	all.	In	my	opinion	the
thing	worth	seeing	from	your	point	of	view	is	the	exemplary	quality	of
the	 place,	 a	 household	 based	 on	much	 that	 is	 real,	 yet	 little	 that	 is
tangible.	 Anyway,	 according	 to	 today’s	 postcard	 (“we	 are	 greatly
looking	forward	to	making	the	acquaintance	of	your	fiancée”),	it	will
be	mainly	a	question	of	choosing	one	of	about	8	paintings	of	Prague,
all	of	which	I	saw	in	Prague,	though	by	now	I	am	unable	in	my	mind
to	distinguish	one	from	the	other;	all	I	know	is	that	at	the	time	I	stood
and	stared	at	all	of	 them	in	admiration.	At	 the	moment	 the	pictures
are	 in	Cologne,	but	appear	 to	be	on	 their	way	 to	Berlin.	 (Succinctly
put!)	He	will	 telephone	you	when	 they	arrive.	And	now	 I	 leap	 from
the	impersonal	typewriter	into	highly	personal	good	wishes.

Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	August	26,	[1916]

Dearest,	a	good	photograph	deserving	special	thanks,	since	it	appears
to	 have	 been	 sent	 unrequested	 (though	 the	 request	 is	 in	 fact	 on	 its
way).	 Black	 or	 bronzed,	 it	 is	 the	way	 you	 hold	 yourself	 that’s	most



distinctive;	the	white	Fräulein	Grete	is	extremely	real;	Frl.	Schürmann
was	caught	too	suddenly	for	one	to	judge,	unless	one	were	to	say	that
the	 face,	 the	eyes,	 the	nose,	 the	smile	 turned	out	somewhat	affected
and	 sugary;	 next	 to	 that	 very	 handsome	 brother	 she	 finds	 it
particularly	 difficult	 to	 hold	 her	 own.	 But	 this	 is	 not	 criticism.—I
shan’t	 be	 able	 to	 consider	 the	 Sunday	 business	 as	 solved	 until	 I	 get
news	 of	 your	 first	 all-Sunday	 excursion.—Some	 of	 my	 questions
remain	unanswered;	 for	 example,	what	 suddenly	made	 you	 think	 of
the	 last	 evening	 in	Marienbad,	 etc.?	 Or	 the	 position	with	 regard	 to
your	mother	and	our	future?

Kind	regards,	Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	August	30,	[1916]

Dearest,	 no	 news	 for	 a	 long	 time.	 Here	 too	 things	 have	 been
somewhat	 confused,	but	 this	 is	not	unusual.—I	wonder	what	 sort	of
an	impression	you	will	get	of	Feigl.	Your	memory	is	correct;	 I	wrote
and	told	you	about	him,	but	I	didn’t	go	and	see	him	in	Berlin.	What	a
pity	 that	 you	 will	 have	 sacrificed	 a	 probably	 beautiful	 Sunday
afternoon	 to	 this	 visit.	 But	 only	 an	 afternoon,	 for	 at	 lunch	 you	 had
visitors,	which	means	 that	 you	 didn’t	 go	 to	 the	 country	 as	 you	 had
meant	 to	at	 the	earliest	opportunity	and	no	doubt	would	have	 liked
to,	and	this	despite	the	people	from	Waldenburg41	having	left	in	good
time	 that	 morning.	 So	 it	 is	 largely	 my	 fault	 on	 account	 of	 the
paintings.—Jewish	 Home?	 I	 merely	 meant	 to	 add:	 Possibly	 and
probably	 it	 will	 involve	 you	 in	 certain	 expenses.	 These,	 without
exception,	you	must	allow	me	to	bear,	so	that,	apart	from	the	pleasure
I	get	from	your	working	there,	I	can	participate	in	yet	another	way.

Franz

[TWO	POSTCARDS]
[Prague,]	August	31,	1916

Dearest,	many	thanks	for	the	letter	and	its	welcome	amount	of	detail.
There	 is	 indeed	 something	 disappointing	 about	 typescript;	 one	 is
tempted	 to	 turn	 over	 the	 cold	 page	 to	 see	 if	 there	 isn’t	 some	 living
thing	on	the	other	side,	nevertheless	it	has	great	advantages.	Besides,
it	almost	seems	as	though	you	feel	more	at	home	with	the	typewriter.



—I	like	to	think	of	you	among	people	like	the	painter	and	his	wife;	by
the	way,	I	do	believe	one	sees	him	more	for	what	he	is	by	first	talking
to	him	alone.	Do	you	feel	confident	when	it	comes	to	pictures?	I	don’t
often.	 I	 did	with	 2	 or	 3	 of	 Feigl’s	 paintings.	 I	 believe	 he	may	 have
accomplished	a	great	deal	already.—They	have	now	been	married	for
3	or	4	years.	She	struck	me	as	somehow	very	cold,	but	 I	did	realize
that	one	could	not	judge	her	merely	on	one	hour	in	a	coffeehouse	and
½	an	hour’s	walk.	Indeed	they	looked	a	somewhat	strangely	assorted
couple,	 but	 since	 they	 themselves	were	 obviously	well	 pleased	with
their	union,	 I	 too	was	delighted	to	accept	 it.	 I	hardly	remember	him
from	our	 school	days.	When	 I	 try	 to	picture	him,	all	 that	appears	 is
something	very	incompetent	and	tall	at	the	back	of	the	classroom,	but
it	 is	by	no	means	certain	 that	 this	 is	he.—What	has	a	very	powerful
effect	 on	me	 is	 his	way	 of	 talking	 and	 thinking,	 half-crazy	 yet	 very
methodical.	 Then	 there	 is	 his	 endless	 seeking	 and	 endless	 certainty
which	you,	as	I	would	too,	call	“instantaneous	optimism,”	despite	the
fact	 that	 you	 could	only	have	 sensed	 it,	 since	 at	 tea	 it	 could	hardly
have	 been	 very	 obvious.	 I	 cannot	 understand	 the	 impression	 of
boyishness	 vis-à-vis	 his	 wife,	 for	 surely,	 although	 cold,	 heavy,	 and
proud,	she	does	live	entirely	through	his	personality.	So	it	seemed	to
me.	 Do	 you	 think	 the	 Paris	 picture	 would	 be	 a	 suitable	 wedding
present?	What	is	it?	What	size?	And	will	he	send	it?	We	will	pay	150
kronen,	 not	much	 for	 the	 painting,	 a	 lot	 for	 the	 present.	When	 you
have	time,	write	and	tell	me	more	about	the	afternoon.	How	you	felt
in	that	atmosphere.

Franz

[IN	 THE	 MARGIN]	How	does	Frl.	Bloch	bear	 it,	 and	what	does	 it	mean	 to
her?

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	September	1,	1916

Dearest—yesterday’s	 letter	 still	 makes	 me	 happy,	 two	 things	 in
particular	that	were	 in	 it:	powers	of	observation,	and	respect	 for	 the
individual.	 Do	 write	 and	 tell	 me	 a	 little	 more	 about	 the	 afternoon,
especially	 about	what	 you	 saw.	 For,	 as	 far	 as	 I	 know,	 he	 [Friedrich
Feigl]	 is	 engaged	 upon	 some	 vast	 project,	 drawings	 illustrating



Dostoevski’s	major	works	for	the	publishing	house	of	Müller.42	Did	he
show	you	 any	 of	 these?	When	 I	 last	 spoke	 to	 them	he	 and	his	wife
were	 suffering	 from	 the	 same	 depression	 you	 mention.	 This	 time,
however,	it	was	justified,	as	I	learned	today	from	Feigl’s	brother	who
came	 to	 see	 me	 at	 the	 office.—I	 am	 deeply	 disturbed	 by	 Fräulein
Grete’s	 suffering;	 I	 am	 sure	 you	 won’t	 desert	 her	 now	 as,
inconceivably,	you	have	done	sometimes	in	the	past.	(Indeed,	I	am	the
first	 to	 understand	 this;	 there	 are	 times	when,	while	 trying	with	 all
one’s	 might	 to	 get	 inside,	 one	 is	 dragged	 straight	 out	 again	 by	 the
scruff	 of	 one’s	 neck.)	 By	 being	 kind	 to	 her,	 you	 are	 acting	 on	 my
behalf	 as	 well.—Since	 yesterday,	 after	 3	 days	 remarkably	 free	 of
headaches,	I	have	been	feverish—from	the	tips	of	my	toes	to	those	of
my	hair.	By	the	way,	about	a	fortnight	ago	I	went	to	see	a	doctor	who
is	 as	 good	 as	 any	 doctor	 can	 be.	 (My	 fits	 of	 despair	 send	 me	 not
through	a	window,	but	to	a	doctor’s	office.)	But	of	this,	more	later.

Kindest	regards,	Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	September	3,	1916

Dearest,	 only	 a	 few	 words,	 I	 am	 very	 much	 behind	 time,	 Ottla	 is
expecting	me	at	the	swimming	baths,	the	blood—quite	unsolicited—is
racing	through	my	head	again,	so	for	a	while	I	must	expose	it	to	the
air.—I	 haven’t	 written	 to	 your	 sister	 yet,	 I	 have	 her	 address	 in	 a
telegram,	 but	 so	 far	 I	 have	 been	 unable	 to	 find	 it.	 To	 you	 I	merely
want	to	say	this:	If	the	danger	reaches	her,	then	almost	everything	is
lost.	 I	 by	 no	means	 exclude	 the	 possibility,	 but	 at	 the	moment	 it	 is
unnecessary	 to	worry	about	 it.	 In	any	case	 I	will	write	 to	her.—The
desire	 to	get	your	mother’s	 future	 settled,	Felice,	was	not	 in	 fact	 for
my	sake,	but	 for	hers	(to	tell	 the	truth,	 I	was	thinking	merely	of	 the
apartment	problem),	although	it	 is	a	good	thing	to	discuss	it.43	Your
savings	 are	 a	 complete	 and	 well-nigh	 (don’t	 be	 cross!)
incomprehensible	surprise	to	me.	More	about	this	soon.

Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	September	7,	1916

Dearest,	three	days	without	news,	and	then	today	the	letter	with	the



photographs.	True,	they	are	not	very	good,	and	one	of	them	looks	like
a	dress	 rehearsal	 for	 the	mourning	chorus	 in	The	Trojan	Women;	 yet
they	 affect	 me	 deeply	 and	 I	 clasp	 them	 to	 myself.	 Give	 me	 such
pleasure	more	often.—Your	question	with	regard	to	children	is	one	of
the	most	difficult,	and	probably	quite	 insoluble.	 It	actually	plays	 the
most	 important	 part	 in	my	 fits	 of	 despair.	 It	 is	 impossible	 either	 to
solve	or	 to	neglect.	What	a	scourge	 this	greatest	of	powers	has	been
turned	into!—The	way	you	put	the	question,	incidentally,	does	make
it	rather	easier	 to	answer.	 In	each	of	 the	three	marriages	 there	 is	an
obvious	 explanation,	 or	 rather	 an	 attempt	 at	 justification.	 No	 one
wants	 to	 be	 unjustified,	 or	 at	 least	 not	 without	 having	 made	 the
attempt	 at	 justifying	 himself,	 or	 rather,	 not	 so	much	 himself	 as	 the
relationship.	For	women	it	is	both	a	wrong	and	a	privation,	for	men	I
dare	say	it	is	simply	a	wrong,	but	one	which	has	to	be	atoned	for	in
many	ways.	Is	that	more	or	less	clear?
While	about	to	finish	this	postcard	at	home,	I	see	an	announcement
in	 the	Berliner	Tageblatt	 (evening,	 Sept.	 5)	 of	 the	 exhibition	 “Mother
and	Infant”	and	the	lectures	to	be	held	there.

Kind	regards,	Franz

[IN	THE	MARGIN]	I	am	definitely	not	against	the	typewriter.

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	September	8,	1916

Dearest,	your	 letters	of	 the	5th	and	6th	arrived	 today,	many	 thanks.
You	 write	 about	 apartments.	 How	 I	 longed	 for	 silence	 yesterday—
complete,	impenetrable	silence!	Do	you	think	I	shall	ever	achieve	it	as
long	as	I	have	ears	to	hear	with	and	a	head	producing	within	itself	a
profusion	 of	 the	 inevitable	 clamor	 of	 life?	 Silence,	 I	 believe,	 avoids
me,	as	water	on	the	beach	avoids	stranded	fish.	Yesterday	afternoon	I
spent	 an	 almost	 rapturous	 hour	 with	 a	 book,	 Dostoevski	 by	 Otto
Kaus.44	In	Marienbad	I	showed	you	a	snapshot	of	Blei,45	with	a	young
man	 in	 uniform	 beside	 him,	 that	 is	 Kaus.	 I	 cannot	 recommend	 the
book	 to	 you	 because,	 to	 begin	 with	 at	 least,	 it	 seems	 almost
incomprehensible,	 but	 with	 a	 certain	 attitude	 of	 mind	 available	 to
anyone	who	is	familiar	with	literature	and	our	time,	it	becomes	very
simple,	almost	too	simple.



Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	September	9,	1916

Dearest,	 I	 still	 haven’t	 got	 your	 sister’s	 address,	 but	 surely	 you	will
have	recovered	from	the	initial	excitement	by	now.	The	whole	thing	is
not	 urgent,	 merely	 desirable.—Since	 you	 got	 on	 so	 well	 with	 the
Feigls,	and	since	they	are	sure	to	be	going	away,	you	might	perhaps
pay	them	a	farewell-cum-condolence	visit.	Or	better	still,	perhaps	just
send	them	an	appropriate	postcard.	He	hasn’t	written	to	me	yet,	nor
have	the	pictures	arrived.	Incidentally,	he	is	said	to	have	received	an
exceptionally	 nice	 letter	 from	 the	 director	 of	 the	 National	 Gallery
(Bode?)46	with	 regard	 to	his	 graphic	work,	 a	 letter	written	with	 the
express	 purpose	 of	 removing	 the	 cause	 of	 his	 depression.	Moreover,
things	 cannot	be	as	bad	as	all	 that	with	his	wife	 if	 she	 continues	 to
show	such	an	interest	in	clothes—especially	since	you,	after	all,	were
not	dressed	in	mourning.	I	assume	your	remark	about	the	similarity	of
all	women	was	made	in	order	to	frighten	me?	As	a	sign	of	trust,	I	will
accept	even	 this	 remark.—I	am	 looking	 forward	enormously	 to	your
account	of	Thursday	evening.—As	to	papers,	no	doubt	I	need	only	my
birth	 certificate	 and	 that	 of	 domicile.	 I	 hear	 they	 are	 quite	 easy	 to
obtain.	It’s	simply	a	matter	of	giving	a	few	hours	to	it.

Kind	regards,	Franz

[IN	THE	MARGIN]	Just	now	the	younger	[Ernst]	Feigl	brought	me	his	poems
—rather	obscure,	extremely	earnest	things.47

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	September	10,	1916

Dearest,	 in	Sunday-haste.	Going	off	again	with	Ottla.	The	day	before
yesterday	 was	 a	 holiday,	 we	 went	 to	 two	 marvelous	 places	 I
discovered	recently,	again	near	Troja	but	far	more	beautiful	than	the
edge	of	that	wood.48	The	one,	still	in	long	grass,	is	surrounded	by	low
banks	 at	 varying	 distances,	 yet	 completely	 closed	 in	 and	 entirely
exposed	 to	 the	 radiant	 sun.	The	other,	not	 far	 away,	 a	deep	narrow
undulating	 valley.	 Both	 as	 silent	 as	 the	 Garden	 of	 Eden	 after	 the



expulsion	of	Man.	To	disturb	the	peace	I	read	Plato	aloud	to	Ottla;	she
taught	me	to	sing.	Somewhere	in	my	throat	there	must	be	gold,	even
if	it	does	sound	like	tin.

Kind	regards,	Franz

September	11,	1916
Dearest,	it’s	early	yet,	work	is	waiting,	my	chief	is	waiting,	my	head—
once	 again	without	 enough	 sleep—would	 probably	 prefer	 to	 rest	 on
the	back	of	the	chair,	and	yet	here	I	am	sitting	at	my	typewriter,	for
you.	For	it	does	seem	as	though	the	pleasure	your	letter	gives	me	can
only	 be	 expressed	 in	 plenty	 of	 space,	with	 room	 for	 all	my	 elbows.
That	you	have	at	last	got	together,	you	and	the	Home,	is	certainly	the
most	important	thing;	everything	else—being	a	good,	indeed	the	very
best	thing	that	could	happen—will	solve	itself.	As	far	as	is	permissible
from	 here,	 I	 am	 in	 complete	 agreement	 with	 your	 opinion	 of	 the
external	 aspect,	with	your	 criticism	as	well	 as	your	praise	 (though	 I
wouldn’t	want	to	accept	the	piano	as	a	model	for	the	furnishing	of	our
apartment);	 but	 all	 this	 is	 in	 anticipation,	 and	 incidental.	 The	main
thing	 is	 the	 human	 element,	 only	 the	 human	 element.	 I	would	 very
much	 like	 to	 hear	 more	 about	 this.	 And	 a	 few	 words	 about	 Dr.
Lehmann,	 and	 indeed	 about	 his	 lecture.	 I	 don’t	 understand	 the
contradiction	 of	 your	 not	 having	 been	much	 surprised	 by	what	 you
heard	 (I	 suppose	 this	was	meant	 to	 be	 slightly	 derogatory),	 and	 yet
having	 been	 puzzled	 for	 a	 long	 time	 by	 the	 ideas	 expressed	 in	 the
lecture	 (surely	 this	 would	 show	 too	 much	 rather	 than	 too	 little
surprise).	By	the	way,	so	far	as	the	lecture	is	concerned,	you	seem	to
have	 been	 especially	 lucky,	 since	 it	 dealt	 with	 the	 fundamental
question	 which	 in	 my	 opinion	 can	 never	 lie	 dormant,	 but	 will
continue	to	flare	up	time	and	again,	to	disturb	the	very	foundations	of
Zionism.	But	just	this	initial	work,	also	as	far	as	you	are	concerned,	is
perhaps	 still	 relatively	 the	best	protected	against	 those	disturbances,
and	perhaps—too	big	a	perhaps,	the	word	refuses	to	be	uttered.	In	any
case,	for	the	kind	of	work	to	be	done	there	at	first,	even	a	faint	breath
of	 the	 spirit	 pervading	 the	Memoirs49—which	 I	 sent	 you	 some	 time
ago,	and	which	I	warmly	recommend	to	you	once	again	and	forever—
would	be	 sufficient.	 So	 it	 is	 about	 the	people	who	were	 there	 that	 I
want	 to	 hear,	 also	 about	 the	 girls	 whom	 you	 think	 I	 would	 have
considered	very	beautiful.	Were	some	of	the	children	from	the	Home



also	present?	Was	there	a	discussion	in	the	course	of	which	one	could
form	an	idea	of	any	one	person?	I	am	glad	Frl.	Bloch	was	there,	too.
What	does	she	have	to	say	about	it?	What	pleases	me	especially	about
the	whole	thing	is	that	I	somehow	felt	(it	is	most	imprudent	of	me	to
tell	you,	but	there	is	no	room	for	prudence	between	us	now,	since	the
subject	is	too	important	and	you	and	I	too	close)	that	the	opening	up
of	these	new	fields	is	bound	to	make	you	realize	that	so	far	you	have
been	partly	 (only	 partly,	 no	 one	 can	wholly	 deny	himself,	 indeed	 if
you	 think	 anything	 of	me,	 you	 are	 sure	 to	 feel	 the	 same	 about	me)
deflected	 from	the	really	 important	matters	 that	were	able	 to	arouse
the	best	of	your	powers:	 that	your	office,	your	family,	 literature,	the
theater	were	able	by	 their	very	nature	 to	claim	only	part	of	what	 is
best	in	you;	that	here,	however,	lies	the	actual	connecting	link	which
in	its	turn	will	let	everything	else,	including	your	family,	etc.,	benefit
by	 what	 is	 best	 in	 you.	 In	 saying	 all	 this	 I	 have	 deliberately	 not
touched	 upon	 that	 which	 concerns	 us	 and	 our	 relationship;	 on	 this
subject	 let	us	be	 silent.	But	 if	 in	 fact	 some	echo	of	 these	 ideas—not
just	 from	 that	 chance	 evening,	 but	 of	 the	 whole	 project	 and	 its
possibilities—should	have	fallen	upon	you	(and	by	spreading	to	your
surroundings,	also	upon	Frl.	Bloch),	I	should	be	very	happy.
As	for	my	headaches,	they	have	been	variable	recently,	therefore	on
the	whole	quite	bearable,	however	bad	on	certain	days	of	martyrdom.
The	doctor	whom	I	went	to	see,	and	who	examined	me	as	carefully	as
doctors	 generally	 examine	 one,	 was	 very	 pleasant.	 A	 quiet,	 rather
funny	man	who	nevertheless,	by	his	age	and	physical	bulk	(how	you
could	ever	come	to	trust	anything	as	long	and	thin	as	me	is	something
I	shall	never	understand)—as	 I	was	saying,	by	his	bulk	(thick	 lips,	a
broad	 rotating	 tongue),	 his	 neither	 excessive	 nor	 affected	 sympathy,
his	modesty	in	medical	matters,	as	well	as	some	other	traits,	inspired
confidence.	 He	 declared	 he	 could	 find	 nothing	 but	 extreme
nervousness.	His	suggestions	were	actually	very	funny:	not	too	much
smoking,	 not	 too	much	 to	drink	 (though	a	 little	 now	and	 then),	 eat
more	vegetables	 than	meat,	preferably	no	meat	 for	supper,	a	visit	 to
the	swimming	baths	from	time	to	time—and	at	night	lie	down	quietly
and	go	to	sleep.	This	final	suggestion	in	particular	was	presented	in	a
most	appetizing	fashion.	That	was	about	all.
But	now	I	really	must	stop;	I	have	already	been	interrupted	5	times,
each	time	more	menacingly.
That	Fräulein	Schwabe,	so	far	only	vaguely	mentioned,	was	she	at
the	Home,	too?	As	far	as	the	necessary	as	well	as	the	merely	desirable



expenses	 in	 connection	 with	 the	 Home	 are	 concerned,	 you	 will,	 in
accordance	with	my	 request,	 allow	me	 to	bear	 them?	By	 the	way,	 I
recently	gave	Max	a	copy	of	the	Memoirs,	and	I	am	about	to	give	one
to	 Ottla;	 I	 am	 giving	 them	 away	 right	 and	 left.	 They	 are	 more
appropriate	for	this	day	and	age	and	more	to	the	point	than	anything
else	I	know,	as	well	as	being	the	liveliest	encouragement.

Kindest	regards,	Franz

September	12,	1916
Dearest,	 I	 hinted	 at	 some	 of	 the	 things	 you	 ask	 me	 about	 in
yesterday’s	reply,	though	not	the	most	important	ones.	I	am	unable	to
put	it	in	writing,	and	that	I	shouldn’t	even	be	able	to	talk	about	it	is
my	 consolation.	 On	 this	 subject	 my	 ideas	 are	 not	 as	 clear	 as	 you,
being	what	you	are,	quite	rightly	demand;	they	are	not	even	clear	in
the	negative	sense;	yet	even	if	they	were,	I	believe	I	should	hesitate	to
communicate	 them.	 By	 submitting	 to	 you	 certain	 magazines	 and
books	I	might	have	tried	to	guide	you	toward	an	intellectual	climate
which	I	considered	suitable	for	you.	But	I	refrained;	it	wouldn’t	have
been	any	good;	this	kind	of	feeble	guidance	can	produce	nothing	but
feeble	results,	quite	apart	from	the	fact	that	you	could	have	evaded	it
by	a	mere	turn	of	the	head,	as	you	did	for	instance	over	the	Memoirs.
Rightly	evaded	it,	I	should	add,	for	this	attempt	at	incoherent	contact
with	you	from	afar	bordered	on	the	irresponsible.	That’s	why	I	was	so
pleased	in	Marienbad	when,	without	my	having	expected	or	intended
it,	 you	 tackled	 the	 idea	 of	 the	 Home	 quite	 independently	 and	 very
well,	 and	 now	 intend	 to	 let	 it	 lead	 you	 on.	 Only	 the	 reality	 of	 the
Home	 can	 teach	 you	 anything	 of	 importance—any	 reality,	 however
small.	Don’t	be	prejudiced	in	favor	or	against,	nor	let	the	thought	of
me	 affect	 your	 open	mind.	 You	will	 see	 those	 in	 need	 of	 help,	 and
opportunities	of	giving	help	judiciously,	and	in	yourself	the	power	to
help—so	 help.	 It	 is	 very	 simple,	 yet	 more	 profound	 than	 any
fundamental	 ideas.	 Everything	 else	 you	 ask	 about	 will,	 if	 you	 go
through	with	 it,	 follow	quite	naturally	 from	 this	one	 simple	 fact.	As
far	as	I	am	concerned,	please	consider	that	this	work	removes	you	to
some	 extent	 from	me,	 since—in	 any	 case	 at	 present,	 and	 I	 am	 not
thinking	 of	 my	 state	 of	 health	 in	 this	 connection—I	 wouldn’t	 be
capable	 of	 doing	 this	 kind	 of	 work;	 I	 would	 lack	 the	 necessary
dedication.	However,	this	is	only	to	some	extent.	On	the	whole	I	can



think	of	no	closer	spiritual	bond	between	us	than	that	created	by	this
work.	I	shall	live	on	every	small	thing	you	do,	on	every	difficulty	you
shoulder	 (though	 it	must	 not	 be	 detrimental	 to	 your	 health);	 I	 shall
live	on	every	one	of	these	things,	as	on	your	last	letter.	As	far	as	I	can
see,	 it	 is	positively	the	only	path,	or	threshold	to	it,	that	can	lead	to
spiritual	liberation.	The	helpers,	moreover,	will	attain	that	goal	earlier
than	 those	 who	 are	 being	 helped.	 Beware	 of	 the	 arrogance	 of
believing	the	opposite,	this	is	most	important.	What	form	will	the	help
in	the	Home	take?	Since	people	are	sewn	into	their	skins	for	life	and
cannot	alter	any	of	the	seams,	at	least	not	with	their	own	hands	and
not	 directly,	 one	 will	 try	 to	 imbue	 the	 children—at	 best	 respecting
their	 individual	 characters—with	 the	 spirit	 and	 more	 indirectly	 the
mode	of	life	of	their	helpers.	In	other	words	one	will	try	to	raise	them
to	 the	 standard	of	 the	contemporary,	 educated,	West	European	Jew,
Berlin	 version,	 which	 admittedly	 may	 be	 the	 best	 type	 of	 its	 kind.
With	 that,	 not	 much	 would	 be	 achieved.	 If,	 for	 instance,	 I	 had	 to
choose	between	the	Berlin	Home	and	another	where	the	pupils	were
the	Berlin	helpers	(dearest,	even	with	you	among	them,	and	with	me,
no	 doubt,	 at	 the	 head),	 and	 the	 helpers	 simple	 East	 European	 Jews
from	Kolomyja	or	Stanislawow,	I	would	give	unconditional	preference
to	 the	 latter	 Home—with	 a	 great	 sigh	 of	 relief	 and	 without	 a
moment’s	hesitation.	But	I	don’t	think	this	choice	exists;	no	one	has	it;
the	 quality	 corresponding	 to	 the	 value	 of	 the	 East	 European	 Jew	 is
something	 that	 cannot	 be	 imparted	 in	 a	 Home;	 on	 this	 point	 even
family	 education	 has	 recently	 been	 increasingly	 unsuccessful;	 these
are	 things	 that	 cannot	 be	 imparted,	 but	 perhaps,	 and	 here	 lies	 the
hope,	 they	 can	 be	 acquired,	 earned.	 And	 the	 helpers	 in	 the	 Home
have,	I	imagine,	a	chance	to	acquire	them.	They	will	accomplish	little,
for	they	know	little	and	are	not	very	bright,	yet	once	they	grasp	the
meaning	of	it,	they	will	accomplish	all	they	can	with	all	their	hearts,
which	on	 the	other	hand	 is	a	 lot,	 this	alone	 is	a	 lot.	The	connection
between	all	 this	 and	Zionism	 (valid	 for	me,	not	necessarily	 for	 you)
lies	 in	 the	 fact	 that	 the	 work	 in	 the	 Home	 derives	 from	 Zionism	 a
youthful	 vigorous	method,	 youthful	 vigor	 generally,	 and	 that	where
other	means	might	fail	it	kindles	national	aspirations	by	invoking	the
ancient	 prodigious	 past—admittedly	 with	 the	 limitations	 without
which	Zionism	could	not	exist.	How	you	come	to	terms	with	Zionism
is	your	affair;	any	coming	to	terms	with	it	(indifference	is	out	of	the
question)	will	give	me	pleasure.	 It	 is	 too	soon	to	discuss	 it	now,	but
should	you	one	day	 feel	 yourself	 to	be	 a	Zionist	 (you	 flirted	with	 it



once,	 but	 these	 were	 mere	 flirtations,	 not	 a	 coming	 to	 terms),	 and
subsequently	 realize	 that	 I	 am	not	a	Zionist—which	would	probably
emerge	 from	 an	 examination—it	 wouldn’t	 worry	 me,	 nor	 need	 it
worry	 you;	 Zionism	 is	 not	 something	 that	 separates	 well-meaning
people.
It	 is	 late,	and	 for	 two	days	now	both	head	and	blood	refuse	 to	be
pacified.

Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	September	13,	1916

Dearest,	no	news	today.	It	really	doesn’t	matter	if	my	last	two	letters
contained	only	a	 little	of	what	you	wanted	to	hear.	After	all,	 I	hope
we	 shall	 have	 frequent	 opportunities	 to	 correspond	 on	 this	 subject.
How	successful	was	 the	apartment	hunt	which	of	course	has	my	full
approval?	Holding	 on	 to	 the	 old	 apartment	was	 a	 delusion,	 albeit	 a
reverent	 one,	 as	 delusions	 often	 are.	 What	 was	 that	 inspection	 you
had	to	carry	out	on	Friday?	And	why	is	the	dentist,	who	always	fills
me	with	horror,	 looming	up	again?—Naturally,	I	was	amazed	by	the
inconceivable	amount	of	your	savings.	You	must	have	magic	in	your
fingers;	the	money	that	flows	out	must	have	a	devious	way	of	flowing
back	again.	 In	 such	matters	my	official’s	hands	quite	 lack	 the	magic
touch.

Franz

[IN	THE	MARGIN]	I	hope	to	get	the	report	about	Monday	by	Friday	at	the
latest.

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	September	15,	1916

Dearest,	 postcards	 of	 the	 11th,	 12th,	 and	 13th	 and	 the	 letter	 of	 the
12th	arrived	today.	This	accumulation	partly	balanced	the	bad	news,
though	 quite	 enough	 headaches,	 toothache,	 and	misery	 were	 left.	 I
thank	 you	 for	myself,	 and	 for	 you,	 and	 for	 the	 two	 of	 us,	 for	 your
regular	 visits	 to	 the	Home	 (an	 exaggerated	word	 for	 the	 first	week,
but	 you	will	 justify	 it).	 It	 is	 a	 great	 help	 that	 you	 like	 the	 outward



appearance	of	the	whole	thing;	you	could	so	easily	have	been	put	off
by	it—not	that	 this	would	have	diminished	its	value.	You	have	been
spared	this	particular	test,	which	of	course	doesn’t	mean	there	won’t
be	others.	As	for	your	question,	I	will	write	and	tell	you	shortly;	today
I	have	 to	make	do	with	 a	bad	 typewriter	 and	haven’t	much	 time.—
One	 more	 thing:	 The	 other	 day	 I	 was	 invited	 to	 give	 a	 reading	 in
Munich,	as	part	of	a	course	entitled	“Evenings	for	Modern	Literature.”
I	wouldn’t	mind,	I	like	reading,	and	perhaps	you	could	come,	too	(on
October	 6th	 or	 11th).	 But	 the	 passport	 difficulties,	 which	 for	 this
purpose	might	not	be	 insuperable,	are	nevertheless	 too	great	 for	 the
amount	 of	 energy	 and	 time	 at	 my	 disposal.	 So	 I	 may	 well	 have	 to
refuse.	 Great	 pity.	 On	 that	 evening	 I	 was	 supposed	 to	 have	 done	 a
reading	with	Wolfenstein.50

Kind	regards,	Franz

[FOUR	POSTCARDS]
[Prague,]	September	16,	1916

Dearest,	again	just	a	few	words,	but	intimate	ones.	It	is	the	Home	that
brings	us	so	close.	Don’t	be	afraid	of	the	girls’	questions,	or	rather,	be
afraid	of	them,	and	regard	this	fear	as	the	most	beneficial	part	of	the
Home.	 Actually,	 it’s	 not	 the	 questioning	 you	 fear,	 it	 is	 also	 the
unasked	questions	 that	 you	will	 sometimes	 find	 frustrating;	nor	 is	 it
merely	the	questions	asked	by	these	girls,	but	also	those	asked	by	the
menacing	or	benevolent	“useful	people”	of	whom	you	wrote	so	kindly
and	devotedly.	On	the	whole	it	will	be	up	to	you	to	get	them	to	trust
you	in	other	than	religious	matters	and,	where	the	sharing	of	religious
experience	 is	 needed,	 to	 let	 the	 dark	 complexity	 of	 Judaism,	which
contains	 so	 many	 impenetrable	 features,	 do	 its	 work.	 Nothing	 of
course	 should	 be	 blurred	 in	 this	 way,	 as	 people	 are	 inclined	 to	 do
here.	In	my	opinion	this	would	be	entirely	wrong.	I	wouldn’t	think	of
going	to	the	synagogue.	The	synagogue	is	not	a	place	one	can	sneak
up	to.	One	can	do	this	today	no	more	than	one	could	as	a	child;	I	still
remember	how	as	a	boy	I	almost	suffocated	from	the	terrible	boredom
and	 pointlessness	 of	 the	 hours	 in	 the	 synagogue;	 these	 were	 the
rehearsals	staged	by	hell	for	my	later	office	life.	Those	who	throng	to
the	 synagogue	 simply	 because	 they	 are	 Zionists	 seem	 to	 me	 like
people	trying	to	force	their	way	into	the	synagogue	under	cover	of	the
Ark	 of	 the	 Covenant,	 rather	 than	 entering	 calmly	 through	 the	main



door.	But	as	far	as	I	can	see,	it	is	quite	different	for	you	than	it	is	for
me.	While	I	should	have	to	tell	the	children	(it	is	unwise,	of	course,	to
encourage	such	conversations,	and	on	their	own	they	would	arise	but
rarely,	for	town-bred	children	have	sufficient	experience	of	the	world
and,	if	they	are	East	European	Jews,	know	how	to	protect	themselves
and	 at	 the	 same	 time	 to	 accept	 the	 other	 person)	 that	 owing	 to	my
origin,	 my	 education,	 disposition,	 and	 environment	 I	 have	 nothing
tangible	 in	 common	with	 their	 faith	 (keeping	 the	Commandments	 is
not	 an	 outward	 thing;	 on	 the	 contrary,	 it	 is	 the	 very	 essence	 of	 the
Jewish	faith)—thus,	while	I	would	somehow	have	to	admit	it	to	them
(and	I	would	do	so	candidly,	for	without	candor	everything	would	be
quite	 pointless	 in	 this	 case),	 you	 on	 the	 other	 hand	 may	 not	 be
altogether	lacking	in	tangible	connections	with	the	faith.	They	may	of
course	be	merely	half-forgotten	memories	buried	beneath	the	clamor
of	the	city,	of	business	life,	and	of	the	tangled	mass	of	discussions	and
ideas	assimilated	over	the	years.	I	don’t	mean	to	say	that	you	are	still
standing	on	the	threshold	of	the	door,	but	perhaps	somewhere	in	the
distance	you	can	just	see	the	gleam	of	the	door	handle.	I	mean	that	in
reply	to	their	questions	you	might	be	able	to	give	the	children	at	least
a	sad	answer;	I	could	not	do	even	that.	But	this	would	be	enough	to
gain	their	trust	in	every	case.	And	now,	dear	teacher,	when	are	you	to
start?
I	 have	written	 to	 your	 sister.	 Since	 on	 the	 one	 hand	 you	 did	 not
refute	 my	 counterarguments	 but	 on	 the	 other	 did	 not	 suggest	 I
shouldn’t	 write,	 I	 wrote	 a	 halfheartedly	 convinced,	 and
correspondingly	convincing,	letter.

Franz

September	18,	1916
Dearest,	lunch	can	wait,	first	I	must	reply	briefly	to	your	letter.—You
are	 tackling	 the	 matter	 both	 calmly	 and	 enthusiastically,	 which	 is
good.	 The	 Sunday	 excursion	may	 have	 been	 of	 importance	 for	 you.
Here,	by	the	way,	it	was	a	lovely	day.	We,	Ottla	and	I,	freezing	a	little
despite	 the	 bright	 sun	 immediately	 facing	 us,	 sat	 above	 a	 lovely
valley,	undulating	and	not	very	wide,	with	a	grand	panoramic	view	in
all	 directions.	 We	 read	 Strakhov’s	 “Recollections	 of	 Dostoevski.”51
From	 now	 on,	 however,	 I	 shall	 read	 nothing	 but	 Foerster’s
Jugendlehre.52	 I	 am	 not	 familiar	 with	 Foerster,	 but	 have	 heard	 him



greatly	praised,	 though	I	have	been	rather	perplexed	by	some	of	 the
examples	 I	 have	 heard	 quoted	 from	 the	 book	 (much	 appreciated	 by
Felix).	In	this	case,	however,	the	same	is	true	as	in	all	the	work	done
for	the	Home:	for	real	practical	work,	pedagogics	cannot	be	learned;
but	 with	 the	 help	 of	 a	 sensible	 book	 on	 the	 subject,	 one’s	 own
pedagogic	 capabilities	 can	be	awakened,	 can	become	conscious,	 and
appraised;	more	than	this	a	book	cannot	do,	nor	should	one	expect	it
to.	Your	first	suggestion	which	was	accepted	seemed	to	me	right,	the
second	open	to	doubt.	If	Foerster	were	read	as	part	of	the	course,	one
would	probably	be	tempted	not	to	read	him	at	home,	or	to	read	him
carelessly,	 whereas,	 by	 the	 method	 adopted,	 obviously	 everyone
anxious	 to	 follow	 will	 read	 the	 whole	 book,	 and	 not	 merely	 the
section	allotted	to	him.	Hence	the	doubts	you	raise	need	not	be	taken
too	seriously.	Everyone	will	get	to	know	Foerster	by	reading	Foerster,
and	if	from	her	précis	he	gets	some	idea	of	Felice	as	well,	so	much	the
better,	 especially	 in	 view	 of	 the	 purpose	 that	 I	 believe	 a	 pedagogic
book	can	have	 for	 the	work.	According	 to	 the	heading,	you	seem	to
have	taken	on	one	of	the	most	 important	chapters.	Why	only	after	a
struggle?	Doesn’t	everyone	 take	part?—I	will	 try	 to	obtain	 literature
about	 the	 Home	 in	 Vienna.	 Perhaps	 you	 could	 give	me	 some	more
specific	 information	on	the	subject.	 I	 should	also	 like	 to	hear	a	 little
more	 about	 the	 earlier	 lecture	 on	 religious	 education.53—Was	 Frl.
Bloch	there,	too?
Perhaps	I	am	asking	too	much	of	you,	considering	the	vast	amount

of	work	that	falls	upon	you.	I	can	only	say	that,	however	much	work	I
cause	 you,	 the	 pleasure	 your	 letters	 give	 me	 is	 infinitely	 greater,
diminished	only	by	the	thought	of	your	being	grossly	overworked.	Is
your	chief	in	Berlin?	Have	you	got	an	assistant?

Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	September	19,	1916

Dearest,	 today	 no	 news.	 I	 had	 Foerster’s	 Jugendlehre	 sent	 to	 you
yesterday,	 an	 unbound	 edition,	 so	 that	 even	 if	 by	 now	 you	 own	 a
bound	 copy,	 you	 can	 have	 one	 that	 can	 be	 taken	 apart,	 and	 won’t
have	to	keep	running	around	with	the	heavy	volume.	I	looked	through
it	yesterday,	 even	 read	your	 chapter	 from	beginning	 to	end	 (despite
positively	 radiant	 headaches).	 Of	 its	 kind	 it	 is	 an	 admirable	 book,



even	though	to	my	mind	a	number	of	things	might	be	said	about	and
around	 it.	 I	 must	 have	 sat	 on	 the	 edge	 of	 my	 bed	 for	 an	 hour
yesterday	without	 lying	down,	 just	thinking	about	it.	Now,	however,
after	a	morning	at	the	office,	it	is	no	longer	as	clear	in	my	mind.	Your
section	can	be	summarized	easily	in	30	sentences.	Send	me	a	copy	of
your	précis,	 and	 then	we	can	discuss	 it	 further.	Also	 send	me	a	 few
words	about	what	I	wrote	to	you.—How	was	it	possible	that	in	spite
of	all	your	efforts	you	were	unable	to	find	an	apartment?	That	augurs
ill	for	future	apartment	hunting.	I	may	be	able	to	go	[to	Munich]	after
all.	 I	 heard	 today,	 though,	 that	 it	 was	 Max	 who	 arranged	 the
invitation;	 my	 inclination	 to	 go	 has	 diminished	 correspondingly.
Would	 you	 undertake	 the	 immense	 journey?	Not	 in	 order	 to	 attend
the	lecture,	that	was	not	what	I	wanted,	but	in	order	to	spend	a	few
hours,	 it	 may	 be	 a	 matter	 of	 5	 hours	 or	 so,	 with	 me.	 But	 it	 isn’t
definite	yet.

Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	September	20,	1916

Dearest,	good,	indeed	very	good,	that	you	took	part	in	the	excursion.
But	 a	 4-hour	 walk	 is	 almost	 too	 much	 for	 a	 girl	 exhausted	 by	 a
working	 week,	 even	 though	 it	 makes	 up	 for	 the	 lack	 of	 air	 and
exercise	during	those	evenings	at	the	Home.	In	any	case	take	care	of
yourself,	 don’t	 do	 too	much;	 one	 evening	 a	 week	 Foerster	 and	 one
evening	 lessons	 should	 certainly	 be	 the	 utmost,	 and	 if	 you	 devote
every	other	Sunday	to	it	as	well,	you	have	done	your	share.	You	could
add	 to	 my	 pleasure	 by	 doing	 gentle	 exercises	 one	 evening	 a	 week,
according	to	the	program	announced	back	 in	Marienbad.—Have	you
heard	any	more	from	[Friedrich]	Feigl,	or	written	to	him?	I	assume	he
is	coming	 to	Prague,	nevertheless	 it	 is	 strange	 that	he	neither	writes
nor	sends	the	picture.	I	have	had	no	Saturday	news	from	you.	Lost?

Franz

[IN	THE	MARGIN]	How	about	the	dentist?

[POSTCARD]



[Prague,]	September	22,	1916
Dearest,	I	never	really	expected	you	to	attend	the	other	course	as	well.
Will	you	be	able	to	take	on	all	 this	without	overexerting	yourself	on
the	one	hand,	and	diminishing	your	receptivity	and	efficiency	on	the
other?	 The	 discussion	 you	 describe	 is	 typical;	 theoretically	 I	 am
always	 inclined	 to	 favor	 proposals	 such	 as	 those	 made	 by	 Herr
Scholem,54	 which	 demand	 the	 utmost,	 and	 by	 so	 doing	 achieve
nothing.	 So	 one	 simply	 mustn’t	 appraise	 such	 proposals	 and	 their
value	by	the	actual	result	laid	before	one.	Incidentally,	I	think	this	is
generally	applicable.	Actually,	Scholem’s	proposals	 in	themselves	are
not	 impracticable.—I	am	very	pleased	 that	you	get	on	well	with	 the
girls	and	 that	you	have	hopes	of	getting	 to	know	them	better.	What
would	be	very	harmful	in	this	connection,	however,	is	a	kind	of	self-
satisfaction,	a	hint	of	which—though	so	small	that	it	may	be	invisible
to	 all	 but	 my	 own	 anxious	 and	 particularly	 searching	 eye—can	 be
detected	 in	your	 letter	when	you	“wish	one	could	give	 them	a	great
deal	 and	 mean	 much	 to	 them.”	 One	 should	 never	 believe	 that	 one
deserves	the	children’s	gratitude,	but	should	always	remember	that	it
is	oneself	who	has	to	be	grateful.	If	one	has	nothing	to	be	grateful	for,
one	 is	 in	 the	 unhappy	 position	 of	 a	 schoolmistress	who	 is	 not	 even
paid	 for	 her	 ordeal.	 The	 very	 symbol	 of	 hell.—Which	 reminds	 me,
your	 old	 story	 [“The	 Judgment”]	 is	 to	 be	 published	 soon.	 I	 have
replaced	the	outdated	dedication55	with:	“To	F.”	Is	this	all	right	with
you?

Kind	regards,	Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	September	23,	1916

Dearest,	no	news;	this	week	had	only	Monday’s	postcard	and	letter.—
Today’s	lovely	weather	has	somewhat	revived	me	again.	Perhaps	you
too	 will	 have	 another	 lovely,	 though	 I	 hope	 less	 strenuous,	 Sunday
with	 the	 children.	 I	 wish	 I	 too	 could	 sit	 beside	 you	 in	 the
compartment	and	ask	 if	 I	might	ask	a	question.	 In	 that	case	perhaps
my	 everlasting	 restlessness	 would	 cease.	 Far	 too	 often	 I	 suffer
mentally	 the	 physical	 sensations	 of	 a	 shipwreck	 when	 the	 body	 is
swept	mercilessly	up	and	down	amid	gigantic	waves.	I	keep	meaning
to	tell	you	about	the	following:	Do	you	remember	the	short	piece	of
prose	that	was	supposed	to	have	appeared	in	Der	Jude	as	a	postscript



to	an	article	of	Max’s?	The	consignment	was	first	lost,	then	sent	again
at	 a	 later	 date,	 and	 finally	 Buber	 accepted	Max’s	 article	 with	 some
reservations	 (which	 I	 too	 considered	 the	 only	 sensible	 thing	 to	 do),
but	rejected	my	“Dream,”	though	in	a	letter	more	complimentary	than
any	ordinary	letter	of	acceptance	could	have	been.56	I	mention	this	for
two	reasons:	firstly	because	the	letter	gave	me	pleasure,	and	secondly,
by	 this	 trivial	 example	 to	 show	 you,	 with	 an	 official’s	 typical
apprehension,	 the	 precariousness	 of	 my	 financial	 and	 intellectual
existence.	 And	 even	 supposing	 I	 do	 one	 day	 accomplish	 something
(my	 restlessness	 won’t	 let	me	write	 a	 line),	 it	 is	 quite	 possible	 that
even	people	who	are	well	disposed	toward	me	will	turn	me	down,	and
the	others	of	course	all	the	more	so.

Kindest	regards,	Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	September	24,	1916

Dearest,	such	a	beautiful	day	that	I	even	managed	to	get	out	of	bed	in
the	morning	and	 in	passing	 looked	 in	at	 the	office	 to	 inquire;	not	 in
vain,	 letters	 of	 the	 21st	 and	 22nd	were	 there.	 I	 don’t	 know	 how	 to
convey	to	you	the	pleasure	I	derive	from	them.	It	is	almost	as	though
the	girls	were	my	children	and	had	acquired	a	mother	(belatedly?)	or
as	though	you	were	my	child	and	in	your	turn	had	acquired	a	mother
in	 the	 group,	 or	 as	 though	 I	 were	 sitting	 somewhere	 in	 peace,	 and
much-needed	 rain	 was	 pouring	 down	 upon	 my	 land.	 And	 the
miraculous	thing	about	all	this	would	be	that	I	don’t	really	deserve	it,
but	 that,	 owing	 to	 some	 hidden	 universal	 law,	my	 not	 deserving	 it
cannot	be	held	against	me.—I	will	write	at	length	tomorrow,	or	send
you	 the	 précis	 as	 I	 imagine	 it.	 As	 an	 introduction	 I	 consider
“Schlemihl”	rather	good	and	I	will	have	10	copies	of	“Schlemihl”	with
illustrations	 from	 Die	 Weltliteratur57	 sent	 to	 you	 tomorrow.—In	 my
thoughts	I	follow	you	with	giant	strides	on	your	way	to	Mühlbeck.

Franz

September	25,	1916
Dearest,	 now	 the	 précis,	 I	 hope	 you	 will	 get	 it	 in	 time;	 I	 am
improvising	 it	 very	 hurriedly	 for	 I	 have	 been	 unexpectedly	 busy
today,	 and	 besides,	 for	 various	 reasons	 and	 nonreasons,	 I	 have	 not



spent	much	time	on	Foerster	since	that	first	reading.	And	so	today,	in
order	 to	write	 the	précis	on	your	chapter,	 I	had	 to	 race	 through	 the
first	48	pages	clenching	my	teeth.	So	let	us	begin.	No,	before	I	start:	I
too	believe	 it’s	 right	 to	go	 through	 the	whole	 thing	 first,	 three	parts
reading,	one	part	discussion,	and	 then,	as	 the	 lecturer	who	has	 read
his	 particular	 chapter	 with	 particular	 care	 and	 is	 intent	 upon
communicating	this	advantage	to	the	others,	to	summarize	the	whole
thing	 in	 short	 sentences.	Moreover,	 I	 don’t	 think	 it	 is	 the	 lecturer’s
business	on	this	occasion	to	express	doubts	about	the	 justification	of
some	 of	 Foerster’s	 assertions,	 but	 I	 do	 consider	 it	 necessary	 that	 a
special	 evening,	 or	 a	 lecture	 at	 the	 end	 of	 the	 whole	 course,	 or
perhaps	at	the	end	of	the	theoretical	part,	should	be	set	aside	for	the
discussion	 of	 doubts	 raised	 by	 some	of	 Foerster’s	 statements.	 In	 this
case	 I	would	be	very	 glad	 to	draft	 something	 for	 you	 in	 accordance
with	my	ideas	on	the	subject.	Well,	now	for	the	précis:
So	far	the	general	aspects	of	Foerster’s	method	of	ethics	have	been
presented—actually	 in	 2	 main	 groups,	 one	 suggesting	 that	 the
children	should	be	guided	from	everyday	life	toward	moral	laws,	the
other	guiding	them	back	from	moral	laws	toward	everyday	life.	Both
of	 these,	which	of	course	have	 to	be	organically	combined,	apply	 to
moral	teaching	as	such,	as	well	as	to	purely	academic	instruction.	In
the	 chapter	 under	 discussion	 the	 investigation	 is	 confined	 to	 moral
instruction	as	applied	to	the	different	subjects	of	academic	instruction.
The	 subjects	 to	be	dealt	with	 are	 the	natural	 sciences—in	particular
physics,	 physiology,	 and	 astronomy;	 furthermore	 the	 study	 of
languages,	history,	literature,	singing,	and	music.	Geography	is	hardly
touched	upon.
In	 the	 natural	 sciences	 it	 is	 more	 important	 than	 elsewhere	 to
establish	a	connection	with	ethics,	for	here	lies	the	true—in	itself	not
inevitable	 yet	 actually	 existing—cause	 for	 a	 departure	 from	 moral
laws.	Two	examples	of	moral	 reaction	are	given:	An	 illustration	 (for
children	 of	 11–14	 years)	 of	 how	 pointless	 all	 discoveries	 and
inventions	are	bound	to	be	 in	 the	absence	of	ethical	man	capable	of
making	 use	 of	 them.	 And	 then,	 for	 pupils	 in	 higher	 grades,
Prometheus’	 deed	 and	 punishment	 illustrating	 what	 happens	 when
power	is	acquired	in	defiance	of	higher	authority,	and	the	expiation	of
this	sin.
In	astronomy	the	possibility	of	establishing	a	connection	could	be	as
follows:	When	examining	the	discoveries	of	Copernicus,	to	see	them	as
a	profound	distrust	of	all	appearances,	the	kind	of	wholesome	distrust



one	 should	maintain	 when	 assessing	 one’s	 own	moral	 conduct.	 The
humility	which	in	the	study	of	astronomy	is	bound	to	follow	from	the
recognition	of	one’s	own	 limitations,	 should	also	be	aimed	at	 in	 the
recognition	of	one’s	own	imperfect	moral	conduct.
The	study	of	languages	can	be	based	on	the	fact	that	it	constitutes
the	 first	 practical	 step	 toward	 a	 love	 of	 humanity	 which	 expresses
itself	 in	 the	 true	realization	of	 inner	hospitality,	 in	detachment	 from
the	narrowness	of	one’s	own	feelings,	and	in	entering	an	alien	point	of
view,	 thus	 creating	 greater	 tolerance	 and	 humility.	 Without	 this
experience,	merely	learning	a	language	achieves	but	little.	This	can	be
seen	 in	 the	 irreconcilable	 differences	 that	 exist	within	 a	 community
speaking	the	same	 language,	as	 for	example	between	different	social
classes,	 or	 between	 different	 generations.	 In	 this	 sense	 it	 is	 also
necessary	 for	 everyone	 to	 study	 the	 language	 of	 his	 fellow
countrymen.
In	the	ordinary	teaching	of	history,	both	ethics	and	history	are	often
abused.	 The	 usual	 attempts	 to	 present	 history	 as	 proof	 of	 the
statement	“History	is	the	final	judge”	are	both	wrong	and	dangerous.
Instead,	 one	 should	 abandon	 this	 type	 of	 historical	 reasoning,
impossible	 in	 itself,	 and	 confine	 oneself	 to	 the	 psychological
presentation	of	the	ravages	caused	by	violence	in	the	soul	of	both	the
perpetrator	 and	 the	 ravaged.	 This	 is	 the	 only	 way	 to	 reduce	 to
impotence	 the	 dazzling	 glare	 of	 historical	 events.	 (In	 any	 case	 read
aloud	“The	End	Justifies	the	Means”	and	page	66,	paragraph	2,	for	a
typical	 example	 of	 Foerster’s	 reasoning.)	 The	 fundamental	 ethical
error	 of	 trying	 to	 achieve	 freedom	 by	 the	 often	 tempting	means	 of
violence	is	illustrated	by	Christ’s	example.
Alas,	 it	 is	 too	 late	to	continue.	 I	have	reached	approximately	page
71,	so	all	that	remains	is	art	and	literature,	the	study	of	music	being
confined	 to	 examples	 such	 as	 the	 excellent	 “The	 Second	 Voice,”58
which	will,	 at	 least	 in	 part,	 have	 to	 be	 read	 aloud.	 In	 conclusion	 it
might	be	pointed	out	that	one	should	on	no	account	allow	oneself	to
be	diverted	from	the	book’s	main	teaching	(formulated	once	again	on
page	 68,	 beginning	 of	 the	 last	 paragraph)	 by	 the	 inevitably
unconnected	examples,	of	which	there	are	many	more	in	the	practical
section	 (to	 which	 one’s	 attention	 is	 drawn	 on	 many	 occasions).
Needless	to	say,	they	all	have	but	one	purpose:	to	establish	the	main
teaching	more	firmly.

Franz



Don’t	take	on	too	much	work,	Felice!	Why,	for	instance,	do	you	have
to	write	the	Report?59

September	26,	1916
Dearest,	 no	 news	 either	 yesterday	 or	 today.—To	 begin	 with,	 a	 few
questions	to	be	answered	briefly:	How	many	evenings	a	week	do	you
now	spend	at	the	Home,	and	how	many	hours?	How	far	away	is	the
Home	and	how	do	you	get	 there?	What	 is	Dr.	Lehmann’s	 lecture	on
religious	education	chiefly	concerned	with?	You	say	 the	girls	choose
their	 own	 helpers.	 How	 do	 they	 have	 the	 opportunity	 to	 make	 a
choice?	After	all,	you	weren’t	chosen,	or	were	you	appointed	on	trial?
And	why	is	Miriam	no	longer	in	charge?	Do	you	know	her	personally?
And	what	has	happened	to	the	second	lady	who	applied	for	the	job?
She’s	 probably	 the	 one	 you	 called	 Rotstein.	 You	 divide	 the	 work
between	yourselves,	and	in	what	way?	Your	friends,	your	sisters,	and
your	mother,	who	has	been	robbed	of	two	Sundays	now	what	is	their
attitude	to	the	Home?	Why	did	you	take	on	the	typing	of	the	Annual
Report,	no	doubt	a	task	that	someone	else	could	have	performed,	and
which	will	mean	a	huge	additional	burden	for	you	even	if	the	report
were	 to	 be	 only	 one	 page?	 (To	 some	 extent	 this	 question	 is	 self-
interested,	 for	that	page	might	have	been	far	better	spent	on	me.)	 Is
your	 chief	 in	 Berlin?	Have	 you	 an	 assistant,	 and	 how	 is	 she	 doing?
Why	did	you	have	to	move	yet	again?	No	further	attempts	to	find	an
apartment	 since	 that	 one	 failure?	Has	 there	 been	 any	 news	 of	 Herr
Danziger?	Have	 you	heard	 from	Feigl,	 or	written	 to	him?	Have	 you
heard	from	your	sister?	(I	haven’t)—Enough	questions	for	today.
Yesterday	 I	 got	 them	 to	 send	 you	 10	 copies	 of	 the	Weltliteratur

“Schlemihl”	 on	 good-quality	 paper	 on	which	 I	 hope	 the	 illustrations
will	look	better.	By	the	way,	I	don’t	even	know	this	issue.	In	addition
you	 will	 receive	 2	 copies	 of	 “Schlemihl”	 from	 Schaffstein.60	 These
little	 books	 are	 probably	 more	 attractive	 than	 those	 from	 the
Weltliteratur,	chiefly	on	account	of	the	original	illustrations,	but	I	don’t
think	 they	 contain	 the	 full	 text.	 In	my	 opinion	 the	 girls,	 instead	 of
following	the	story	in	their	own	copies,	should	be	given	the	booklets
by	you	as	a	keepsake,	after	 completing	 “Schlemihl.”	The	choice	 is	 a
good	one	to	start	off	with,	for	the	story’s	wide	range	of	interest	alone.
Unfortunately	I	cannot	even	begin	to	imagine	either	the	needs	or	the
abilities	 of	 these	 fortunate	 n-to-14-year-olds.	 Incidentally,	 have	 you
noticed	 that	 Foerster,	 to	 begin	 with	 at	 least,	 pays	 no	 particular



attention	to	the	education	of	girls?	This	gives	you	the	opportunity	to
supplement	according	to	your	own	experience.	I	have	not	really	had	a
chance	as	yet	to	talk	to	Max	about	reading	matter	for	your	particular
group;	I	am	afraid	that	for	this	age	he	won’t	have	many	suggestions,
either.	The	only	thing	I	can	suggest	offhand	would	be	Stories	from	the
Bible	(or	some	such	title)	by	Sholem	Asch.61	 I	don’t	know	them,	and
the	short	pieces	of	his	I	have	read	I	have	thought	pretty	unbearable,
but	this	particular	book	is	supposed	to	be	rather	good.	I	shall	have	it
sent	to	you	before	long.	I	also	think	one	day	you	might	try	them	with
that	 little	 book	 by	 Lichtwark62:	 Exercises	 in	 the	 Contemplation	 of
Pictures	(or	some	such	title),	a	book	with	a	value	akin	to	Foerster’s—
excellent	 in	 its	way,	but	beyond	that	open	to	doubt.	 I	will	have	 this
sent	to	you	as	well.
When	I	advised	against	too	much	work	at	the	Home	(and	what	you
have	undertaken	seems	too	much	already),	 I	was	not	thinking	of	the
most	obvious	pitfall—namely,	 that	 she	who	 leaps	 into	 the	water	 too
eagerly	will	be	equally	eager	to	leap	out.	I	am	sure	you	wouldn’t	do
that.	It	is	merely	the	fear	of	your	overworking,	and	that	owing	to	the
multiplicity	of	your	efforts	their	intensity	is	bound	to	diminish.	Please
give	me	your	views	on	this.
Starting	 and	 concluding	 the	 class	with	 a	 song	 is	 very	 good	 in	my
opinion,	but	I	don’t	know	why	you	yourself	should	refuse	to	sing.	In
Karlsbad	you	sang	rather	well;	I	mean	you	were	fairly	at	ease,	while	I,
at	 the	 same	 time,	 was	 plagued	 by	 nightmares	 in	 broad	 daylight.
Which	songs	have	been	chosen?
As	 far	 as	 exercises	 are	 concerned,	 I	 would	 like	 to	 remind	 you	 of
Müller’s	method.	You’ve	got	the	book?	But	I	must	point	out	that	these
exercises	 cannot	be	 improvised;	 they	have	 to	be	 studied,	have	 to	be
studied	beforehand.
I	may	be	giving	a	reading	in	Munich	after	all.	The	fact	that	you	will
come	(as	you	see,	 it	has	taken	me	no	time	to	make	your	conditional
acceptance	unconditional)	acts	as	a	strong	 incentive.	But	 it	won’t	be
until	November.	A	detour	via	Berlin	is	impossible	for	several	reasons,
and	as	 far	 as	 I	 am	concerned	not	 very	desirable.	 I	would	 rather	 see
you	 in	Munich	 than	 in	Berlin,	 though	 I	 regret	 the	effort	 the	 journey
will	 impose	 on	 you,	 and	 the	 Home	 too	 I	 would	 rather	 see	 through
your	eyes	than	in	reality.	Put	this	down	to	my	present	frame	of	mind,
and	perhaps	also	to	my	character.

Franz



[POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Prague,	September	27,	1916]
September	26,	1916

Dearest,	no	news	the	day	before	yesterday,	yesterday,	or	today;	rather
a	 long	 time,	 isn’t	 it?	 Though	 I	 do	 understand	 it:	 on	 Saturday	 and
Sunday	you	simply	hadn’t	 the	 time.	But	 today	 is	a	bad	day	anyway.
Though	 yesterday	 was	 all	 the	 better;	 the	 weather	 was	 lovely	 and	 I
went	 on	 an	 excursion	 all	 by	 myself	 to	 that	 plateau	 with	 the	 wide
panoramic	view	I	told	you	about	once	before.	It	was	like	being	in	the
brighter	Beyond.	By	 the	way,	 do	 you	know	 the	 joys	 of	 being	 alone,
walking	 alone,	 lying	 in	 the	 sun	 alone?	Which	 doesn’t	 mean	 I	 have
anything	 against	 doing	 things	 in	 twos,	 and	 not	much	 against	 doing
them	in	threes.	But	what	a	 joy	 it	 is	 for	 the	tormented,	 for	heart	and
head!	Do	you	know	what	I	mean?	Have	you	ever	walked	a	long	way
by	yourself?	The	ability	 to	 enjoy	 it	 presupposes	 a	great	deal	 of	past
misery	as	well	as	past	joys.	As	a	boy	I	was	alone	a	lot,	but	it	was	more
from	force	of	circumstance,	rarely	from	choice.	Now,	however,	I	rush
toward	being	alone	as	rivers	rush	toward	the	sea.

Kind	regards,	Franz

I	 have	 now	 spoken	 to	Max;	 the	 only	 book	 he	 could	 suggest	 off
hand	was	one	by	Sholom	Aleichem.63	But	to	me—and	to	him	too
in	 the	end—it	 seems	 too	 sarcastic	and	complicated	 for	 children.
Instead,	 I	 will	 send	 you	 a	 suitable	 puzzle	 book,	 and	 an
occupational	book	as	well,	that	is	if	I	can	find	it.

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	September	28,	1916

Dearest,	your	Saturday	letter	arrived	today,	not	so	your	good	wishes.
In	these	circumstances	it	 is	unlikely	that	my	précis	will	have	arrived
on	time,	but	as	a	matter	of	fact	you	must	have	made	a	mistake:	that
evening	 surely	 won’t	 be	 held	 on	 New	 Year’s	 Day.	 What	 makes	 me
most	impatient	is	that	your	evening	for	the	children	took	place	a	long
time	 ago,	 and	 yet	 it	 may	 be	 ages	 before	 I	 get	 any	 news.	 I	 know
Schreiber,64	of	course,	and	though	I	have	met	him	only	once	or	twice,
I	 have	 always	 had	 a	 liking	 for	 him.	 A	 man	 constantly	 lost,	 yet
constantly	able	to	extricate	himself	again.	Unhappily	married	as	well,
I	believe.	Do	give	him	my	kindest	regards.	The	Home	is	turning	into	a
fine	meeting	place,	quite	apart	from	its	main	purpose.	I	am	delighted



to	commit	you	to	the	care	of	these	people.
Franz

September	29,	1916
Dearest,	 today	 I	 imagined	 I	 was	 going	 to	 have	 an	 exceptionally
peaceful	 time;	 Foerster	 is	 lying	 beside	 me;	 I	 meant	 to	 write	 the
remainder	of	the	précis,	perhaps	improve	the	whole	thing,	but	it	isn’t
possible,	things	here	are	more	lively	than	usual.	I	shall	be	thankful	if	I
am	allowed	 to	 finish	a	 few	 lines.	Your	Tuesday	 letter	arrived	 today.
These	 letters	of	yours	create	a	stronger	and	deeper	bond	between	us
than	did	the	best	letters	from	the	best	of	the	old	days.	My	only	regret
is	 that	my	 replies	 are	 so	very	 cursory	and	vague—even	vaguer	 than
my	character	would	warrant.	It	is	the	typewriter	that	leads	me	astray
and	 makes	 me	 vague	 and	 voluble,	 while	 it	 permits	 you	 to	 express
yourself	more	clearly	than	usual.	Well,	one	of	these	days	I	expect	the
imperative	 reason	 for	 using	 the	 typewriter	 will	 also	 disappear.	 The
thought	 that	 any	 piece	 of	 news	 could	 be	 lost	 is	 another	 thing	 that
makes	me	nervous.	You	make	a	point	of	telling	me,	for	instance,	that
you	didn’t	write	 last	Monday	on	account	of	Sophie.	But	there	is	also
no	Sunday	letter	 from	you,	so,	 though	I	can	hardly	 imagine	it,	 there
might	 possibly	 have	 been	 some	 news	 in	 a	 Sunday	 letter	 about
Saturday	evening,	your	first	evening	with	the	girls,	which	you	fail	to
mention	on	Tuesday;	but	again	in	that	 letter	there	is	no	word	of	the
proposed	Sunday	excursion.	Once	I	know	for	certain	that	a	letter	has
been	 lost,	 I	am	able	 to	resign	myself	 to	 the	 fact,	but	 the	uncertainty
upsets	me.	So	do	give	me	the	chance	to	understand.	Incidentally,	did
you	 get	 my	 cursory	 reply	 to	 your	 religious	 questions?	 That	 was	 an
immense	 subject	 Lemm65	 took	 upon	 himself,	 almost	 too	 big	 to	 be
covered	 even	 in	 the	 most	 beautiful	 apartment	 in	 Friedenau.	 Who
made	 up	 the	 audience?	 Could	 you	 tell	 me	 something	 about	 the
lecture,	 the	 discussion,	 and	 perhaps	 also	 about	 Dr.	 Lehmann’s	 past
lecture	on	religious	education,	in	just	a	few	words?	I	know	Lemm,	of
course,	from	his	occasional	articles.	His	ideas	are	fanciful	to	the	point
of	eccentricity	(I	wonder	if	you	have	heard	of	his	theory	of	the	middle
land?),	 but	 he	 is	 honest,	 consistent,	 and	 very	 versatile.	 At	 least	 he
appears	 so	 to	 me.	 How	 old	 is	 he?	 Who	 did	 you	 talk	 to	 on	 that
occasion?
Having	 to	 take	 over	 the	 reading	 of	Minna	 von	 Barnhelm66	 is	 an



arduous	 legacy	 indeed.	 Are	 girls	 as	 young	 as	 that	 actually	 able	 to
grasp	 complicated	drama?	Provided	 they	had	not	 progressed	 too	 far
with	 their	 reading,	 and	 even	 if	 they	 had,	 would	 it	 not	 be	 possible,
with	 some	 suitable	 explanation,	 to	 curtail	 the	 reading	 of	 the	 play?
Unless	 your	 predecessor—surely	 not	 Miriam—had	 succeeded	 in
awakening	 in	 them	a	true	 feeling	 for	 the	play.	To	me,	however,	 this
would	be	an	unimaginable	feat.	But	if	these	girls	have	started	tackling
drama,	 then	Asch’s	 book	may	 be	 too	 childish	 for	 them	 (though	 this
might	not	necessarily	be	a	mistake),	for	in	this	case	their	minds	ought
to	be	 ready	 to	 read	 the	Bible	 itself,	 even	 though	 I	personally	would
advise	against	it.	At	any	rate	in	order	to	widen	your	choice	of	suitable
books,	I	will	get	them	to	send	you	Peretz’s	Popular	Tales.67
I	 don’t	 understand	 the	 term	 comradeship	 in	 the	 curriculum.	 Do
those	Wednesday	classes	differ	from	the	reading	and	drama	classes	on
Saturday?	And	 how	 is	 it	 that	 your	 classes	 start	 at	 6	 on	Wednesday,
and	even	as	 early	 as	5	on	Saturday?	Can	you	be	 there	at	 that	 time,
above	all	on	Saturday,	payday?	A	very	good	thing	that	Frl.	Bloch	has
also	found	a	means	of	taking	part.
Yesterday	2	of	Feigl’s	paintings	arrived,	among	them	the	very	one	I
wanted	without	being	able	to	describe	it	from	memory.
The	letter	with	your	good	wishes	arrived	today.	The	gift	of	flowers
is	not	in	keeping	with	my	family	circumstances;	if	I’d	had	to	buy	the
flowers,	I	would	have	had	to	destroy	myself	first.	Surely	you	wouldn’t
want	that.	And	in	that	case	the	flowers	would	never	have	been	bought
at	 all.	 In	 any	 event	 I	 bless	 the	 New	 Year	 for	 having	 provided	 you,
perhaps,	with	two	peaceful	days.

Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	September	30,	1916

Dearest,	 no	 news	 today.	We	must	 come	 to	 some	 arrangement	 about
the	trip	to	Munich.	The	date	has	not	been	decided,	merely	that	it	will
be	 in	November.	 Nor,	 of	 course,	 is	my	 trip	 absolutely	 certain	 yet.	 I
would	have	only	2	days	 in	all,	 singularly	 little	 time,	especially	since
the	trains	to	Munich	are	very	bad;	it	takes	all	day,	and	I	would	have
to	 read	 that	 same	 evening,	 and	 then	 leave	 again	 the	 following
morning.	Unless	a	Sunday	or	a	holiday	could	be	added,	in	which	case
—and	 this	would	be	 the	only	 really	desirable	 thing	about	 the	entire



trip—we	could	have	a	day	to	ourselves.	In	your	New	Year	letter	you
mention	the	possibility	of	coming	to	Prague.	Are	you	serious,	and	do
you	see	a	possibility?	Once	again	I	have	to	admit,	though—you	won’t
take	 it	 amiss—I	would	 prefer	 to	 see	 you,	 say,	 in	 Bodenbach,	 rather
than	here;	however,	and	this	 too	 is	 true,	 rather	here	 than	not	at	all.
What	had	you	in	mind?

Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	October	1,	1916

Dearest,	nothing	again	today.	Rotten,	rotten	night,	partly	your	doing
—dream	 doing.	 The	 following	 nightmare:	 a	 telephone	 call	 from	 the
porter’s	 lodge	 at	 the	 Institute	 to	 say	 there	 is	 a	 letter	 for	me.	 I	 rush
down.	Find	no	porter	there,	but	instead	the	head	of	the	department	to
which	all	incoming	mail	is	invariably	delivered	first.	Ask	for	the	letter.
The	man	examines	the	little	table	upon	which	the	letter	was	supposed
to	have	been	lying	only	a	moment	ago,	but	cannot	find	it,	blames	the
porter	who,	without	 authority,	had	 taken	 the	 letter	 off	 the	mailman
instead	of	allowing	it	to	be	handed	to	the	appropriate	department.	In
any	 case,	 I	 now	have	 to	wait	 for	 the	porter,	 a	 long	wait.	 Finally	he
arrives.	A	giant	both	in	size	and	in	stupidity.	He	doesn’t	know	where
the	 letter	can	be.	 In	desperation,	 I	decide	 to	 lodge	a	complaint	with
the	director,	I	shall	demand	a	confrontation	between	the	mailman	and
the	porter	at	which	the	latter	is	to	give	an	undertaking	never	again	to
accept	letters.	Half	out	of	my	mind,	I	wander	along	corridors	and	up
and	down	stairs,	searching	in	vain	for	the	director.

Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	October	2,	1916

Dearest,	 some	 news	 at	 last,	 your	 letter	 of	 the	 29th.—I	 knew	 in
advance	the	way	you	would	use	the	second	Jugendlehre,	and	of	course
it	is	the	right	way.	But	you	can	safely	take	the	book	apart,	write	your
comments	as	they	arise	while	reflecting	and	teaching	on	pages	the	size
of	 the	book,	 insert	 them	 in	 the	appropriate	places,	and	 then	we	can
have	the	book	bound	to	include	these	pages.	Just	think	what	a	lovely
book	it	would	be!	(I	very	nearly	said:	Just	 think	of	 it.68)	How	about



sending	me	the	notes	you	are	making	for	the	lecture?—Even	here,	far
away,	I	can	feel	the	Home’s	peculiar	quality	you	mention,	its	power	to
dominate	one’s	life.—Sometime	you	might	tell	me	a	little	more	about
the	principal.	Needless	to	say,	a	 little	snapshot	taken	on	one	of	your
outings,	 or	 gatherings,	 or	 anywhere,	would	 be	most	 enlightening.—
The	Sholem	Asch	book	I	had	sent	to	you	is	too	childish	rather	than	too
difficult.	 But	 why	 not	 begin	 with	 Chamisso?	 But	 never,	 never	 with
Wildenbruch;69	nor	is	the	predicament	so	great	as	to	force	one	to	resort	to
Rossegger.70	Hebel71	would	be	very	good	now	and	then.	Have	you	got
it?—The	reading—if	it	comes	off	at	all—will	be	on	Friday,	November
10th;	Saturday	we	could	have	to	ourselves.	Decide!

Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	October	3,	1916

Dearest,	again	nothing;	I	do	receive	harsh	treatment.	So	the	Home	is
near	 the	 Alexanderplatz72	 (of	 numerous	 unhappy	 memories).	 Not
many	 times,	 though	 often	 enough,	 I	 have	 hurried,	 blundered,
wandered	across	it.	The	telephone	conversations,	or	rather	telephone
monologues,	 carried	 on	 by	 the	 wretched	 prisoner	 in	 the	 telephone
booth	at	 the	Askanische	Hof	come	to	mind:	No,	 I	won’t	 repeat	 them
after	all.	This	was	 the	kind	of	baggage	 that	was	gladly	cast	 into	 the
stream	 of	 time;	 it	 is	 useful	 nevertheless	 when	 that	 ever-twisting
stream	comes	close	again	to	take	up	things	of	the	past	once	more.	But
one	 can	 hardly	 afford	 it	 with	 the	 kind	 of	 headaches	 I	 have	 been
carrying	 around	 these	 last	 few	 days	 after	 a	 brief	 but	 comparatively
peaceful	interval.—The	reproach	in	the	first	line	merely	slipped	out	of
my	unreasonable	 typewriter;	my	more	 reasonable	pen	declares	 itself
satisfied	with	one	 letter	 a	week,	 and	moreover	 counts	 every	visit	 to
the	Home	as	equivalent	to	a	letter.—Have	you	got	Hirsch’s	Letters?73	I
believe	German	Jews	consider	the	book	one	of	the	orthodox	standard
works;	I	don’t	know	it	at	all.	Which	edition?——

Kind	regards,	Franz

Max	asks	me	to	thank	you,	and	shares	my	pleasure	(though	a	different
kind	of	pleasure)	at	your	working	at	the	Home.

Franz



[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	October	4,	1916

Dearest,	again	nothing,	 I	had	better	 stop	emphasizing	 it,	by	now	it’s
almost	a	foregone	conclusion.——
That	 was	 my	 morning	 thought,	 for	 later	 your	 Sunday	 letter	 did
arrive.	 Personally,	 that	 is,	 in	 the	 more	 deeply	 personal	 sense,	 I	 am
wholly	 against	 being	 insatiable,	 and	 yet	 it	 keeps	 creeping	 in	 again,
especially	after	wretched	nights	when	one	has	lost	almost	all	vestige
of	self-control.	Don’t	let	it	worry	you.
You	 say	we	 could	 spend	 far	more	 time	 together	 in	 Berlin	 than	 in
Munich.	 I	 don’t	 see	 why,	 and	 anyway	 it	 isn’t	 true.	 In	 Munich,
provided	the	reading	comes	off	and	you	can	spare	the	time,	we	could
have	 Saturday,	November	 11th,	 entirely	 to	 ourselves;	 no	 such	 thing
would	 be	 possible	 in	 Berlin.—Today	 I	 had	 a	 letter	 from	your	 sister.
Needless	to	say,	she	doesn’t	want	to	leave,	is	relatively	contented,	and
just	as	you	once	asked	me	to	warn	her	of	the	danger,	she	now	asks	me
to	 dispel	 your	 fears.	 Incidentally,	 I	was	 surprised	 that	 once	 the	 first
excitement	 was	 over,	 you	 never	 mentioned	 the	 subject	 again,
although	I	referred	to	it	several	times.	I	still	believe	it	is	best	for	her	to
stay	there	for	the	time	being.

Franz

October	5,	1916
Dearest,	 at	 the	 typewriter	 at	 last,	 but	with	 a	 bad	head;	 the	 laws	 by
which	my	blood	rages	within	me	are	inscrutable;	for	some	days	now
my	 whole	 nervous	 system	 has	 been	 in	 turmoil	 again,	 and	 not	 a
moment’s	sleep	is	granted	me.	Last	night	I	went	to	see	Dr.	Bergmann,
who	 is	 on	 holiday	 here;	 he	 was	 at	 school	 with	 me;	 I	 like	 him	 and
wanted	to	see	him	again.	Do	you	know	the	name,	by	the	way?	It	plays
an	important	part	in	Zionism.	Hugo	Bergmann.74	What	I	meant	to	tell
you	here	is	that	I	sat	there	last	night	with	my	aching	head,	feeling	like
a	condemned	man.	And	yet	lately,	for	a	short	while,	I	was	quite	well.
No,	work	is	out	of	the	question	for	me	in	my	present	condition.	But	I
especially	regret	that	as	a	result	I	am	unable	by	letter	to	give	you	the
support	in	your	work	that	I	meant	to,	and	would	have	been	happy	to
give.	You	thank	me,	yet	I	want	to	do	infinitely	more	than	that;	after
all,	what	I	actually	accomplish	is	nothing,	and	pitiful.
Another	 symptom	 of	 my	 head:	 I	 ask	 about	 Danziger	 and	 mean



Steinitz.	 But	 anyway	 the	 thing	 itself,	 at	 least,	 has	 turned	 out	 quite
well.
Only	 yesterday	 I	 discovered	 that	 the	 better	 edition	 of	 the
Weltliteratur	 issue	 of	 “Schlemihl”	 is	 no	 longer	 obtainable,	 but	 the
ordinary	edition	is	probably	not	good	enough	to	give	the	children	as	a
present.	 In	any	case	 I	will	have	only	5	 copies	of	 it	 sent	 to	you,	 and
moreover	 will	 look	 at	 the	 Insel	 edition75	 to	 see	 if	 that	 might	 be
suitable.	But	 before	 I	 do,	 I	would	 like	 to	 know	how	many	girls	 you
actually	have.
Your	comments	in	praise	of	the	exhibition76	may	have	been	written
on	the	very	day	I	wrote	one	of	my	recent	postcards	in	praise	of	being
alone.	I	merely	wish	to	add	that	these	2	elements	don’t	have	to	fight
each	 other;	 on	 the	 contrary,	 they	 could	 very	 well	 build	 up	 a	 life
together.	As	 for	 the	 exhibition,	 it	may	 indeed	be	very	beautiful,	 but
certainly	 not	 complete.	 What	 it	 lacks	 is	 a	 Chamber	 of	 Horrors,	 the
principal	exhibit	of	which	would	have	to	be	a	group	as	depicted,	for
example,	 by	 a	 cousin	 of	 mine,	 with	 her	 husband	 and	 the	 baby
carriage.	A	good	girl,	in	fact	exceptionally	intelligent,	who	somehow,
with	 advancing	 years	 and	 constant	 poverty,	 became	 confused.
Helpless,	 she	 was	 determined	 to	 get	 married,	 and	 married—
admittedly	with	the	approval	of	all	her	variously	informed	relatives—
a	 man	 she	 would	 certainly	 never	 have	 married	 had	 she	 been	 in	 a
calmer	 frame	of	mind.	Personally	 I	have	nothing	against	him;	 in	 the
brief	 moments	 I	 have	 been	 with	 him	 he	 always	 seemed	 very
entertaining	and	funny,	but	not	funny	in	a	way	that	would	make	one
feel	a	fool	if	one	happened	to	be	his	wife.	His	humor	is	by	no	means
generally	appreciated.	If	I	were	to	attempt	to	describe	him	in	detail	it
would	become	too	protracted	and,	 in	view	of	 the	amount	of	 interest
he	has	held	 for	me	up	 to	now,	untruthful.	At	 any	 rate	his	 looks	 are
passable,	too	healthy	rather	than	ill,	permanently	very	contented,	and
hardly	 any	 older	 than	 his	 wife.	 And	 then	 there	 is	 the	 child.	 It	 is
exceptionally	 strong,	 about	 2	 years	 old;	 with	 white	 innocent	 flesh,
luxuriant	 fair	 hair,	 clear	 blue	 eyes,	 it	 resembles	 both	 father	 and
mother,	but	is	more	attractive	than	either.	But	it	is	quite	listless;	it	lies
in	 its	 carriage,	 large	 and	motionless,	 its	 eyes	 roving	 about	 aimlessly
and	 apathetically.	 It	 can’t	 even	 sit	 up,	 the	 mouth	 can’t	 smile,	 and
nothing	 can	 induce	 it	 to	 utter	 a	 word.	 When	 the	 parents	 are	 out
walking	 one	 on	 either	 side	 of	 the	 nursemaid	 and	 the	 carriage,	 and
against	 their	 will	 are	 stopped	 by	 some	 acquaintance	 (me,	 for
example),	and	the	mother—saddled	with	that	father	and	that	child—



stands	there	with	tears	in	her	eyes,	glancing	first	at	the	acquaintance,
then	 at	 the	 child,	 yet	 manages	 a	 smile	 so	 as	 not	 to	 leave	 her
permanently	contented	husband	all	alone	with	his	laughter—well,	this
too	should	form	part	of	that	exhibition.
But	let’s	forget	it;	with	kindest	regards,

Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	October	6,	1916

Dearest,	 yesterday	 your	 Monday	 and	 today	 your	 Wednesday	 letter
arrived;	after	the	latter’s	conclusion,	perhaps	the	door	leading	into	the
girls’	room	will	open	and	you	will	be	accompanied	by	my	most	ardent
good	wishes.—Today	I	was	again	reminded	of	our	Erdmuthe,	because
the	university	library	has	asked	for	the	book	to	be	returned.	Erdmuthe
should	also	be	part	of	that	exhibition,	though	in	a	place	far	removed
from	my	cousin.	She	in	any	case	had	12	children,	perhaps	more,	but
they	 all	 died	 very	 young;	 only	 one,	 I	 believe,	 reached	 the	 age	 of
twenty,	but	died	soon	after.	And	quite	apart	from	this	brood	she	was
in	charge	of	 the	entire	 financial	 side	 (an	almost	 superhuman	 task	 in
view	of	her	husband’s	and	the	Brethren’s	situation)	and	to	some	extent
of	 the	 spiritual	 side	 of	 the	 Moravian	 Church,	 at	 that	 time	 rapidly
spreading	across	the	whole	of	Europe	and	North	America.	Died	at	the
age	of	56.	Soon	after	her	death	her	husband	married	a	girl	with	whom
he	 had	 shared	 a	 deep	 spiritual	 bond	 for	 a	 long	 time.—Today	 I	 sent
you	“Schlemihl”	in	the	Insel	edition.	Unfortunately	there	is	something
wrong	 with	 every	 edition.	 It	 seems	 that	 Schaffstein’s	 is	 incomplete,
Weltliteratur’s	 too	 shabby,	 Insel’s	 print	 too	 small,	 and	 Fischer’s	 too
expensive.	There	are	other	good	editions,	but	without	illustrations.	So
choose,	and	tell	me	what	more	you	need.	Later	on,	if	you	like,	I	will
send	you	Buber’s	letter.77—Kind	regards,	dearest	and	best	one.

Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	October	7,	1916

Dearest,	 nothing	 today;	 the	 best	 of	 all—your	 report	 of	 the	 first
meeting	at	the	Home—will	of	course	take	its	time,	it	won’t	come	in	a
hurry.	By	freely	giving	the	girls	these	rights	(if	I	have	understood	you



correctly),	the	situation	may	be	made	unnecessarily	delicate,	inviting
criticism	 from	 those	who	 are	 already	 over-critical.	 Surely	 the	 same,
and	 more,	 could	 be	 achieved	 by	 simply	 letting	 them	 vote,	 without
actually	 granting	 them	 the	 right	 to	 do	 so.	 But	 perhaps	 this	 is	 just
what’s	happening,	and	I	may	simply	have	misunderstood	you.—As	for
the	Report,	what	annoyed	me	is	the	fact	that	it	is	merely	a	matter	of
copying.	Copyists,	after	all,	 cannot	be	hard	 to	 find.	But	perhaps	one
could	not	very	well	refuse.	From	a	distance	it	is	easy	to	be	severe.—
Max’s	 article	 “Our	Writers	 and	 the	 Community”	 may	 appear	 in	 the
next	 issue	of	Der	Jude.78	And	 incidentally,	won’t	 you	 tell	me	what	 I
really	am:	in	the	last	Neue	Rundschau,	Metamorphosis	is	mentioned	and
rejected	 on	 sensible	 grounds,	 and	 then	 says	 the	 writer:	 “There	 is
something	 fundamentally	German	 about	 K’s	 narrative	 art.”	 In	Max’s
article	 on	 the	 other	 hand:	 “K’s	 stories	 are	 among	 the	most	 typically
Jewish	documents	of	our	time.”79
A	difficult	case.	Am	I	a	circus	rider	on	2	horses?	Alas,	I	am	no	rider,
but	lie	prostrate	on	the	ground.

Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	October	8,	1916

Dearest,	 I	 am	 very	 pleased	 today:	 the	 letter,	 the	 postcard,	 and
Thursday’s	 photographs	 arrived.	 One’s	 latest	 acquisitions	 are	 easily
overestimated,	but	I	really	don’t	 think	I	have	a	better	picture	of	you
than	 this	 one	 with	 the	 children	 on	 your	 left	 and	 the	 (carriage?)
window	 behind	 you.	 You	 may	 be	 rather	 too	 dark	 (perhaps	 your
camera	is	not	being	handled	properly?),	but	on	the	other	hand	more
purposeful,	if	you	see	what	I	mean,	than	in	any	other	picture.	There	is
another	of	the	same	group,	though	without	you,	and	I	suppose	the	girl
with	the	bow	appearing	in	your	place	was	the	one	who	took	the	first
picture.	 Are	 you	 in	 Frl.	 Welkanoz’s	 group	 as	 well?	 If	 I	 am	 not
mistaken	her	face	is	delicate,	with	small	features,	but	distinguished	by
its	 clear	 contours.	 Sabinchen	 reminds	 me	 of	 a	 flower-girl,	 older,
though	very	much	like	her,	whom	Ottla	has	been	teaching	German	for
some	time.—Please,	please	more	about	that	first	meeting.

Franz



[IN	THE	MARGIN]	I	have	been	writing	daily	for	a	long	time	now.

Franz	Kafka’s	mother	to	Felice	Bauer
Prague,	October	8,	1916

My	dear	daughter,
Many	thanks	for	your	kind	letter	with	your	good	wishes	which	we

reciprocate	most	sincerely,	if	somewhat	belatedly.	We	were	very	busy
in	 the	 shop	before	 the	holidays,	which	 is	why	 I	was	prevented	 from
writing	sooner.
We	 observed	 the	 Jewish	 holidays	 like	 good	 Jews.	 Over	 the	 New

Year	our	business	was	closed	for	the	2	days,	and	yesterday,	the	Day	of
Atonement,	we	fasted	and	prayed	a	great	deal.	Fasting	was	no	trouble
since	we	have	been	in	training	for	it	all	year.
The	food	shortage,	by	the	way,	is	so	far	not	too	bad	here	in	Prague,

and	we	would	be	very	glad	to	welcome	you	here	 in	 the	near	 future.
Perhaps	it	would	be	possible	for	you	to	take	a	few	days	off.
We	have	good	news,	 thank	God,	 from	both	Karl	and	Peppo.	Eight

weeks	 ago	 Peppo	 had	 two	 weeks’	 leave,	 and	 Karl	 is	 hoping	 to	 get
some	 leave	 before	 long.	 We	 hope	 to	 see	 you	 very	 soon,	 and	 while
Father	 joins	 me	 in	 sending	 his	 kindest	 regards,	 I	 embrace	 you
affectionately,

your	devoted	mother,	Julie	Kafka

All	our	children	send	their	kindest	regards.

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	October	9,	1916

Dearest,	 nothing	 today,	 but	 remember	 it	 is	 essential	 that	 I	 have	 the
conclusion	 of	 the	 report	 on	 the	 first	 meeting	 at	 the	 Home.	 Horrid
Hertha	may	be	your	main	problem	to	begin	with.	There	must	be	some
good	reason	for	her	behavior.	Your	instructions	to	the	girls	can	hardly
have	been	sufficient,	since	the	girls	evidently	don’t	like	talking	to	her.
Wouldn’t	it	be	a	good	idea	to	write	to	her	direct?	On	the	other	hand,
the	 other	 girl’s	 behavior	 toward	 the	 end	 of	 the	 evening	 is	 less
incomprehensible	to	me;	I	can	imagine	acting	in	the	same	way	myself.
I	 had	 already	 approved	 of	 your	 bringing	Minna	 von	 Barnhelm	 to	 a
premature	conclusion.	It	was	certainly	the	best	thing	to	do.	Children
should	 not	 be	 pushed	 into	 things	 that	 to	 them	 must	 seem	 quite



incomprehensible.	 At	 the	 same	 time	 one	 should	 bear	 in	 mind	 that
even	 this	 can	 occasionally	 produce	 excellent	 results;	 the	 trouble	 is,
they	are	completely	unpredictable.	It	reminds	me	of	a	professor	who,
when	 reading	 the	 Iliad,	 used	 to	 say:	 “It’s	 a	 great	 pity	 that	 one	 is
obliged	 to	 read	 this	 with	 you.	 You	 couldn’t	 possibly	 understand	 it;
even	 if	you	 think	you	do,	you	don’t.	One	has	 to	have	experienced	a
great	deal	before	one	can	understand	even	a	 few	 lines.”	At	 the	 time
these	remarks	(as	a	matter	of	fact	this	was	the	tone	the	man	invariably
adopted)	made	a	far	greater	impression	on	me,	callous	youth,	than	the
Iliad	 and	 Odyssey	 combined.	 Too	 crushing	 perhaps,	 yet	 a	 strong
impression	all	the	same.

Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	October	10,	1916

Dearest,	 nothing	 again	 today,	 sad.	 I	 still	 haven’t	 heard	 everything
about	 that	 first	 meeting	 at	 the	 Home,	 nothing	 about	 your	 report,
nothing	 about	 your	 Sunday.	 Did	 you	 spend	 last	 Sunday	 with	 the
children,	or	the	one	before?	If	it	was	last	Sunday,	then	you	probably
got	 soaked	 in	 the	 great	 downpour	 (“nothing	 remains	 hidden	 from
him”),	while	we,	Ottla	 and	 I,	 in	 an	 attempt	 to	 avoid	 the	 rain	 (here
merely	a	 threat),	 followed	a	zigzag	course,	unlike	our	usual	summer
walks—entirely	at	my	instigation,	since	Ottla	of	course	has	no	fear	of
rain.	 Nor,	 for	 that	 matter,	 have	 I,	 provided	 there	 is	 a	 veranda
somewhere	near	 the	mudbaths,	 and	under	 it	 a	 seat,	 and	on	 the	 seat
you.—With	regard	to	Munich,	so	as	to	be	prepared	in	advance:	When
would	you	arrive?	 In	which	hotel	will	 you	be	 staying?	When	would
you	have	to	leave?	If	 it	can	be	arranged,	I	would	read	a	story	as	yet
unknown	to	you.	It	is	called	“In	the	Penal	Colony.”—Yesterday	I	sent
you	a	handbook	on	outdoor	games	for	girls;	it	may	be	useful	to	you,	it
seems	 rather	 sensible.	Before	 long	 I	will	 send	you	 something	else	of
the	 same	 kind.—For	 your	 reading	 with	 the	 children	 (apart	 from
“Schlemihl,”	with	which	you	should	start)	I	suggest	you	bear	in	mind:
Hebel,	 Tolstoy’s	 Popular	 Tales,	 Andersen’s	 “Galoshes	 of	 Fortune.”
Choose,	and	I	will	send	it.

Franz



[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	October	11,	1916

Dearest,	Saturday’s	and	Sunday’s	letters	arrived	today,	and	then	later,
that	 of	 Monday.—Am	 I	 responsible	 for	 upsetting	 you?	 If	 so,	 please
don’t	hold	it	against	me.	I	have	so	little	self-control,	and	that	little	is
the	 utmost	 I	 can	 muster.	 Again:	 forgive	 me!—On	 the	 other	 hand	 I
cannot	 ask	 forgiveness	 for	 my	 failure	 to	 send	 greetings,	 although	 I
realize	that	your	mother	was	bound	to	shake	her	head,	and	no	doubt
do	more	than	that.	At	best,	and	with	the	utmost	effort,	I	might	be	able
just	 to	 see	 beyond	 the	 limits	 of	my	 character,	 but	 go	 beyond	 them	 I
cannot.	There	is	no	need	for	you	to	understand	this,	nor	will	you	be
able	 to	 sympathize	with	 it;	 you	 should	merely	 be	 aware	 of	 it.	 Your
mother	 of	 course	 need	 not,	 cannot,	 and	 should	 not	 do	 any	 of	 these
things.	In	this	I	am	bound,	from	direst	necessity,	bound	to	fail.	And	I
am	 sorry,	 yet	 not	 sorry	 enough	 to	 wish	 I	 could	 free	 myself	 of	 this
inhibition,	which	in	any	case	I	am	incapable	of	removing.	As	a	matter
of	fact	at	home	I	said	hardly	a	word	about	the	New	Year,	and	to	you
nothing,	quite	in	accordance	with	the	lack	of	significance	I	attach	to
this	 day.	 Anything	 else	 would	 be	 a	 lie,	 and	 one	 that	 in	 its	 own
particular	 way	 would	 have	 many	 ramifications	 for	 me.	 Actually,	 I
have	an	excuse	so	far	as	your	mother	is	concerned,	though	admittedly
a	very	superficial	one.	She	never	answered	my	letter	from	Marienbad,
but	on	no	account	should	that	be	held	against	her,	for	even	if	she	had
replied,	I	still	would	not	have	sent	her	New	Year	greetings.—Dearest,
accept	me	as	I	am.

Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	September	[October]	12,	1916

Dearest,	 that’s	 better,	 even	 though	 impossible	 in	 the	 long	 run:	 your
Tuesday	letter	arrived	today.—If	only	my	journey	were	as	definite	by
now	 as	 happily	 yours	 seems	 to	 be,	 but	 there	 are	 still	 tiresome
obstacles	in	plenty,	and	things	are	far	from	settled.	Besides,	the	train
connection,	with	Munich	in	particular,	is	rather	bad.	I	leave,	I	think,
about	8	A.M.	(the	only	train)	and	don’t	arrive	until	6:24	P.M.,	 thus	not
until	Friday	evening.	I	am	not	sure	yet	about	the	return	journey,	but
am	afraid	I	shall	have	to	leave	by	7	A.M.	on	Sunday,	there	is	no	night



train,	 and	 I	 dare	 not	 ask	 for	more	 than	 2	 days.	We	 can	 discuss	 the
Christmas	 trip,	 I	have	no	wish	 for	us	 to	hide	 from	anyone,	 I	 fear	no
one	except	my	parents;	but	 them,	enormously.	To	 sit	 at	my	parents’
dinner	 table	 with	 you	 (I	 mean	 now,	 later	 on	 it	 may	 become	 quite
easy)	would	be	sheer	torture	for	me.	Yet	even	moments	such	as	these
would	 be	 insignificant	 compared	 to	 the	 joy	 of	 showing	 you	 Prague,
you	alone,	and	more	thoroughly,	more	carefully,	more	seriously	than
ever	before.—Bad	news	from	the	Home,	about	this	later.	By	the	way,
am	I	not	musical?	The	sentence	“I	feel	very	much	at	ease	among	the
children,	much	more	at	home,	in	fact,	than	at	the	office”	sounds	in	my
ears	like	the	most	admirable	music.	How	does	Frl.	Bloch	get	on	with
them?
As	yet	I	know	nothing	about	the	University	Extension;	I	once	asked
you	for	more	specific	information;	you	haven’t	sent	it.

Franz

[IN	THE	MARGIN]	I	still	haven’t	received	the	Annual	Report.

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	October	13,	1916

Dearest,	no	news	today,	nor	has	the	Annual	Report	arrived.	Now	that
you	give	me	the	reason,	of	course	I	approve	of	your	typing	it,	but	in
that	case,	to	be	wholly	consistent,	one	would	really	have	to	copy	the
whole	 of	 Foerster,	 or—eternal	 and	 at	 present	 quite	 inappropriate
scourge!—the	Memoirs80	as	well,	 if	 it	were	true	that	inspired	reading
could	 be	 achieved	 only	 by	 harnessing	 oneself	 to	 the	 typewriter.
Actually	 for	me,	 in	my	 alas	 only	 too	 frequent	 bad	 spells,	 even	 that
would	 be	 too	 ineffective.	 But	 there	 should	 be	 a	 means	 of	 injecting
some	life	into	the	Foerster	course,	of	which	you	say	such	disappointed
and	disappointing	 things.	 In	 these	 circumstances,	 at	 any	 rate,	one	 is
forced	more	than	ever	to	read	the	whole	of	Foerster,	quite	apart	from
the	 section	 assigned	 to	 one.	 And	 however	 bad	 the	 course,	 surely	 it
cannot	 vitiate	 the	 benefits	 derived	 from	 reading	 Foerster	 on	 one’s
own.	 I	wish	 I	had	the	permanent	 tranquility	of	mind	to	discuss	with
you	 by	 letter	 the	 whole	 of	 Foerster,	 chapter	 by	 chapter!	 For	 he	 is
important;	 of	 this	 there	 is	 no	 doubt.—Today	 I	 am	 sending	 you	 a
puzzle	book,	I	wish	it	contained	more,	but	in	the	hands	of	their	lively



grown-up	friend	it	is	sure	to	amuse	the	girls.—How	will	it	be	without
Lehmann,	Lemm,	and	possibly	without	Welkanoz?	At	the	moment	all
good	 things	 seem	 condemned	 to	 remain	 in	 an	 excruciating	 state	 of
suspense,	and	among	the	good	things	I	include	our	union.

Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	October	14,	1916

Dearest,	your	postcard	and	the	Report	arrived	today.	Oh,	the	personal
significance	these	pages	have	for	me!	I	must	say,	it	cannot	have	been
an	easy	task	for	you.	So	far	I	have	only	glanced	at	it,	but	consider	it
most	 informative	 and	 sensible.	 Only	 when	 discussing	 the	 younger
boys’	 groups	does	 it	 become	a	 little	 fanciful.	But	 this	 is	 pardonable,
especially	 in	a	 first	 report.	 In	my	opinion,	what	 it	 lacks	 is	 sufficient
consideration	 for	 the	 organizers	 and	 helpers;	 Zionism	 and	 sweeping
enthusiasm	 are	 not	 enough.	 But	 even	 these	 misgivings	 are
apologetically	 referred	 to	 in	 the	 remark	 that	 after	 the	 war	 the
association	between	the	helpers	and	those	in	their	care	should	become
a	much	closer	one.	In	this	respect	it	is	no	doubt	still	far	from	perfect,
and	your	complaint,	which	I	should	like	to	know	in	detail,	does	after
all	confirm	the	fact.	One	is	aware,	moreover,	that	the	development	of
the	girls’	group	is	not	yet	up	to	that	of	the	boys’.	But	above	all,	and
continuously,	 there	 is	 some	 arrogance	 in	 the	 Report.	 However,
provided	one	doesn’t	stop	working,	time	will	eradicate	this.—Am	I	not
bothering	 you	 by	 sending	 books?	 Am	 I	 not	 depriving	 you	 of	 time
assigned	 to	 reading	Foerster?	What,	 incidentally,	gives	you	 the	 right
to	 think	 I	 didn’t	 finish	 reading	 Erdmuthe	 long	 ago?	 Except	 for	 the
footnotes,	 which	 are	 not	 essential,	 I	 read	 the	 whole	 book	 in
Marienbad.	 Atone	 for	 this	 unjustified	 reproach	 by	 promptly	 sending
snapshots	of	your	outing.

Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	October	15,	1916

Dearest,	such	a	lovely	day,	and	here	am	I	in	the	office.	My	consolation
is	that	you	are	at	Mühlenbeck.—Again	no	news	today.	You	often	say
you	have	had	no	news,	but	fail	to	mention	whether	the	missing	news



has	reached	you	the	following	day.	It	must	have,	for	I	write	every	day.
—I	was	forced	to	lend	Max	the	Report	before	reading	it	a	second	time;
he	needs	it	for	the	girls’	club—that	delicate,	brittle,	yet	by	no	means
worthless	 organization.81	 Your	 complaint	 that	 they	 take	 everything
personally	 is	 in	 effect	 the	 very	 motto	 of	 this	 club.	What	 struck	 me
about	 the	Report	was	 the	 excellence	of	 the	 section	dealing	with	 the
older	boys;	this	was	by	Lehmann,	evidently.	It	consists	of	a	number	of
facts	and	results,	whereas	the	rest	consists	largely	of	things	one	could
have	taken	for	granted	anyway,	though	in	a	first	report	they	are	not
out	of	place.	The	kindergarten,	 incidentally,	 about	which	 they	write
so	modestly,	seems	to	be	excellent.—I	am	alone	today,	Ottla	has	gone
to	the	country,	I	have	the	choice	of	either	going	to	pick	up	Felix	and
his	 wife,	 which	 I	 have	 agreed	 to	 do,	 or	 of	 going	 for	 a	 walk	 alone.
Which	shall	it	be?

Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	October	16,	[1916]

Dearest,	 irritating	day,	tempered	by	your	letter	of	the	13th.—In	case
you	didn’t	guess	right	yesterday,	I	was	alone.	Walked	a	very	long	way,
roughly	5	hours,	alone	yet	not	alone	enough,	in	deserted	valleys,	yet
not	deserted	enough.	At	times	I	am	conscious	of	my	worries,	as	if	they
were	draining	the	blood	from	my	temples.—The	Sabinchen	affair	is	a
delicate	one	indeed.	But	I	cannot	quite	understand	the	circumstances
leading	 up	 to	 it.	 What	 is	 the	 cashbox	 normally	 meant	 for?	 Did	 S.
borrow	 the	 2	marks,	 and	 not	 tell	 the	 others	 until	 afterwards?	Who
decides	what	the	money	in	the	cashbox	is	to	be	used	for?	Where	does
the	money	 come	 from	 originally?	 Didn’t	 the	 former	 principal	 know
about	the	affair?	Needless	to	say	I	do	not	doubt	Sabinchen’s	honesty
and	 need	 of	 help;	 but	 if	 the	 formalities	 for	 borrowing	 were	 not
complied	 with,	 then	 one	 surely	 has	 to	 consider	 that	 the	 other	 girls
might	be	as	honest	and	as	much	in	need	of	help,	and	feel	themselves
at	 a	 disadvantage	merely	 by	 not	 being	 placed	 so	 near	 the	 cashbox.
Whatever	happens,	this	affair	should	not	be	the	cause	of	S.	losing	her
place	 of	 honor.	 But	 the	 whole	 thing	 could	 never	 have	 happened	 if
they	all	trusted	each	other,	and	I	can	see	there	is	a	lot	of	work	for	you
to	do.	I	dare	say	the	first	thing	to	do	is	to	see	Sabinchen	and	Hertha.

Franz



[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	October	17,	1916

Dearest,	 wonder	 of	 wonders,	 although	 it	 still	 isn’t	 definite,	 it	 does
seem	 quite	 likely	 that	 I	 shall	 be	 able	 to	 go.	 After	 removing	 all
predictable	 obstacles,	 may	 this	 venture	 not	 be	 made	 impossible	 by
unpredictable	ones.	It	is	not	out	of	the	question,	by	the	way,	that	the
reading	 will	 be	 postponed	 from	 November	 10th	 to	 the	 17th.	 The
decision	will	be	made	in	the	course	of	the	next	week.	Should	it	be	on
the	 10th,	 you	 will	 have	 to	 forego	 Milan’s	 reading82	 for	 my	 sake;	 I
think	it	is	on	November	9th	in	the	Choralion	Hall;	but	if	it’s	not	on	the
10th	 you	must	 go	 to	 the	Choralion	Hall,	 for	my	 sake.	 The	 selection
(Ebner-Eschenbach,83	Keller,84	Storm85)	may	not	be	the	one	to	show
him	at	his	best;	with	the	exception	of	Keller,	 it	may	be	compared	to
his	reading	of	a	story	by	Jacobsen86	which	I	heard,	and	which	was	his
weakest	(only	relatively	of	course);	nevertheless,	Felice,	you	must	go
and	hear	 it.—I	very	much	approve	of	your	reading	“The	Galoshes	of
Fortune”	to	them;	you	can	also	read	a	lot	more	of	Andersen,	but	never
sections	 that	you	don’t	 intend	 to	 finish	 the	next	 time.	When	reading
Minna	 von	 Barnhelm	 the	 children	 failed	 (and	 rightly	 so)	 to	 get	 an
impression	 of	 the	 whole,	 but	 this	 should	 not	 happen	 again.—I
received	no	news	today.

Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	October	18,	[1916]

Dearest,	my	poor	 excess-postage	payer,	 forgive	me,	 but	 I	 am	almost
entirely	 innocent,	 of	which	 I	 could	 easily	 convince	 you	with	 a	 very
detailed	 description,	 but	 from	 this	 you	 will	 surely	 excuse	 me;	 even
Max,	 the	 post	 office	 official,87	 has	 so	 far	 sent	 nothing	 but	 these
postcards.	 Your	 Saturday	 letter	 arrived	 today,	 later	 in	 the	 day
Monday’s.	The	latter	in	particular	was	very	comforting.	Yesterday	the
mail	 van	 carrying	 the	 afternoon’s	 Berlin	 mail	 was	 burned	 out,	 and
today	 I	 went	 around	 all	 morning	 very	 pensive	 and	 in	 a	 haze,
continually	worrying	about	 the	burned-out	van	 in	which	 it	 is	highly
probable	that	your	Monday	letter	with	your	description	of	the	outing
perished	 in	 the	 flames.	Only	 later	did	your	 letter	arrive;	 so	 it	wasn’t
burned,	after	all.—Max	cannot	get	a	permit	to	go	to	Munich.	During



the	first	part	of	the	evening,	which	may	take	place	after	all,	I	may	be
reading	 some	of	his	poetry.	Am	not	 a	very	good,	 in	 fact	 a	very	bad
reader	of	poetry,	but	if	no	one	better	can	be	found,	I	shall	be	glad	to
do	it.	But	I	must	say	at	once:	If	you	cannot	come,	I	would	prefer	not	to
go,	either.	By	now	I	have	got	too	used	to	the	idea	of	seeing	you	there.
No	 doubt	 after	 October	 22nd,	 by	 which	 date	 your	 chief	 will	 have
returned	from	his	vacation,	you	will	know	for	certain	whether	or	not
the	trip	is	likely	to	be	possible.

Franz

September	[presumably	October88]	19,	1916
Dearest,	 for	me	 to	accept	 the	 things	you	 say	about	Mother,	parents,
flowers,	 the	New	Year,	and	the	company	at	 table	 is	not	as	simple	as
all	that.	You	say	that	for	you,	too,	to	have	to	sit	at	table	in	my	home
with	all	my	family	won’t	“rank	among	your	pleasantest	experiences.”
Here	 you	 are	 merely	 expressing	 your	 opinion,	 and	 rightly	 so,
regardless	of	whether	I	like	it	or	not.	Well,	I	don’t	like	it.	But	I	should
certainly	like	it	a	great	deal	less	had	you	said	the	opposite.	Please	tell
me	as	plainly	as	possible	what	you	think	will	make	it	unpleasant	for
you,	and	where	 the	cause	of	 this	unpleasantness	 lies.	We	have	often
discussed	this	subject	from	my	point	of	view,	but	in	these	matters	it’s
hard	to	grasp	even	a	little	of	the	truth.	One	just	has	to	keep	on	trying.
Roughly—hence	with	 rather	more	 ruthlessness	 than	 the	 truth	would
warrant—I	 can	 describe	 my	 position	 as	 follows:	 Having	 as	 a	 rule
depended	on	others,	I	have	an	infinite	longing	for	independence,	self-
reliance,	 freedom	 in	all	directions;	 I	would	 rather	wear	blinkers	and
go	my	own	way	 to	 the	bitter	end,	 than	have	my	vision	distorted	by
being	in	the	midst	of	frenzied	family	life.	That’s	why	every	word	I	say
to	my	parents,	or	 they	 to	me,	 so	easily	 turns	 into	a	 stumbling	block
under	my	feet.	Any	relationship	not	created	by	myself,	even	though	it
be	 opposed	 to	 parts	 of	 my	 own	 nature,	 is	 worthless;	 it	 hinders	 my
movements,	I	hate	it,	or	come	near	to	hating	it.	The	road	is	long,	one’s
resources	few,	there	is	reason	in	plenty	for	this	hatred.	Yet,	I	am	my
parents’	progeny,	am	bound	to	them	and	to	my	sisters	by	blood;	in	my
daily	life,	and	because	of	the	necessary	obsession	with	my	particular
objectives,	 I	 am	not	 conscious	of	 this,	 yet	 fundamentally	 I	 respect	 it
more	 than	 I	 know.	 Sometimes	 this	 too	 becomes	 the	 object	 of	 my
hatred;	at	home	the	sight	of	the	double	bed,	of	sheets	that	have	been



slept	in,	of	nightshirts	carefully	laid	out,	can	bring	me	to	the	point	of
retching,	can	turn	my	stomach	inside	out;	it	is	as	though	my	birth	had
not	been	final,	as	though	from	this	fusty	life	I	keep	being	born	again
and	 again	 in	 this	 fusty	 room;	 as	 though	 I	 had	 to	 return	 there	 for
confirmation,	 being—if	 not	 quite,	 at	 least	 in	 part—indissolubly
connected	with	 these	 distasteful	 things;	 something	 still	 clings	 to	 the
feet	 as	 they	 try	 to	 break	 free,	 held	 fast	 as	 they	 are	 in	 the	 primeval
slime.	That	is	sometimes.	At	other	times	I	know	that	after	all	they	are
my	 parents,	 are	 essential,	 strength-giving	 elements	 of	 my	 own	 self,
belonging	 to	 me,	 not	 merely	 as	 obstacles	 but	 as	 human	 beings.	 At
such	times	I	want	them	as	one	wants	perfection;	since	from	way	back
and	despite	 all	my	nastiness,	 rudeness,	 selfishness,	 and	unkindness	 I
have	always	trembled	before	them—and	do	so	to	this	day,	for	in	fact
one	never	stops;	and	since	they,	Father	on	the	one	hand	and	Mother
on	 the	other,	have—again	quite	naturally—almost	broken	my	will,	 I
want	them	to	be	worthy	of	their	actions.	(Now	and	again	I	think	that
Ottla	would	be	 the	 kind	of	mother	 I	 should	 like	 in	 the	 background:
pure,	 truthful,	 honest,	 consistent—with	 humility	 and	 pride,
receptiveness	 and	 reticence,	 devotion	 and	 self-reliance,	 timidity	 and
courage,	in	unerring	equilibrium.	I	mention	Ottla	because	my	mother
after	 all	 is	 also	 part	 of	 her,	 though	 altogether	 unrecognizable.)	 So	 I
want	them	to	be	worthy	of	their	actions.	In	consequence,	for	me,	they
are	a	hundred	times	more	unclean	than	they	may	be	in	reality,	which
doesn’t	really	worry	me;	their	foolishness	is	a	hundred	times	greater,
their	 absurdity	 a	 hundred	 times	 greater,	 their	 coarseness	 a	 hundred
times	greater.	On	the	other	hand	their	good	qualities	seem	a	hundred
thousand	times	smaller	than	they	are	in	reality.	Thus	they	deceive	me,
and	yet	I	cannot	rebel	against	the	laws	of	nature	without	going	mad.
So	 again	 there	 is	 hatred,	 and	 almost	 nothing	 but	 hatred.	 But	 you
belong	to	me,	I	have	made	you	mine;	I	do	not	believe	that	the	battle
for	 any	 woman	 in	 any	 fairy	 tale	 has	 been	 fought	 harder	 and	more
desperately	 than	 the	 battle	 for	 you	 within	 myself—from	 the
beginning,	over	and	over	again,	and	perhaps	forever.	So	you	belong	to
me.	 Therefore	my	 relationship	with	 your	 relatives	 is	 not	 unlike	my
relationship	with	my	own,	albeit	far	less	intense,	of	course,	in	regard
to	their	good	as	well	as	their	bad	qualities.	They	too	constitute	a	bond
which	hampers	me	(hampers	me,	even	if	we	were	never	to	exchange	a
word),	 and	 in	 the	 above-mentioned	 sense	 they	 are	 not	 worthy.	 In
saying	 this	 I	 am	 being	 as	 frank	with	 you	 as	 I	 am	with	myself.	 You
mustn’t	hold	it	against	me,	nor	see	any	arrogance	in	it;	there	is	none,



at	least	not	where	you	would	expect	to	find	it.	Suppose	you	were	now
in	Prague,	 sitting	at	my	parents’	 table,	 the	area	of	conflict,	which	 is
what	 I	 fight	 against	 in	 my	 parents,	 would	 naturally	 have	 grown
greater.	They	would	assume	that	my	bond	with	the	family	as	a	whole
had	grown	greater	(but	it	hasn’t,	and	mustn’t),	and	they	would	make
me	feel	 it:	 they	would	think	of	me	as	having	 joined	their	ranks,	one
outpost	 of	which	 is	 the	 bedroom	next	 door	 (but	 I	 have	 not	 joined);
they	 would	 think	 that	 in	 you	 they	 had	 gained	 an	 ally	 against	 my
opposition	(they	have	not	gained	one),	and	in	my	eyes	all	that	is	ugly
and	contemptible	about	them	is	intensified,	since	I	would	expect	them
to	 rise	 to	 this	 greater	 occasion.	 Yet	 if	 this	 is	 so,	why	 did	 I	 not	 like
what	you	said?	Because,	literally,	I	stand	facing	my	family	perpetually
brandishing	 knives,	 simultaneously	 to	 wound	 and	 to	 defend	 them.
Leave	me	to	act	on	your	behalf	in	this	matter,	without	acting	on	my
behalf	so	far	as	your	family	is	concerned.	Isn’t	this	too	great	a	sacrifice
for	you	to	make,	dearest?	It	is	immense,	and	will	only	be	made	easier
for	you	since,	being	what	I	am,	should	you	fail	to	make	it,	I	shall	be
forced	to	wrest	it	from	you.	But	if	you	do	make	it,	you	will	have	done
a	lot	for	me.
I	won’t	write	to	you	for	a	day	or	two,	deliberately,	so	that	you	can
consider	it	and	reply	to	it,	undisturbed	by	me.	My	confidence	in	you	is
such	that	a	single	word	would	serve	as	a	reply.

Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	October	21,	1916

Dearest,	 so	 here	 I	 am	 once	 again.	 The	 day	 before	 yesterday	 and
yesterday	 I	 got	 your	 letters	 of	 Tuesday	 and	 Wednesday,	 but	 the
description	of	the	outing	was	not	among	them.	Perhaps	it	will	arrive
at	the	same	time	as	the	eagerly	awaited	photographs,	among	which	I
hope	there	may	be	a	great	many	of	you.	(Just	now	I	had	to	rush	to	the
telephone	where	 I	was	notified	 that	my	passport	 and	 the	permit	 for
crossing	 the	 frontier	have	been	granted;	all	 that’s	needed	now	is	 the
visa.)	 You	 ask	 me	 about	 Frau	 Hauschner.89	 I	 don’t	 know	 her
personally,	 but	 did	 once	 read	 a	 not	 altogether	 unreasonable	 and
enormously	voluminous	novel	by	her,	and	more	recently	two	or	three
letters	 to	Max	which	were	 immensely	 funny	 owing	 to	 some	muddle
the	old	lady	had	caused,	but	also	touching	and	pleasant	because	of	the



way	in	which	she	genuinely	attempted	to	disentangle	it.	In	addition	I
have	 now	 heard	 from	 Max	 that	 she	 is	 also	 extraordinarily	 rich,
humanitarian,	 and	 philanthropic;	 from	 this	 point	 of	 view	 (from	 no
other,	 she	 is	 by	 no	means	 pro-Zionist)	 she	 is	 also	 interested	 in	 the
Home,	and	might	on	some	suitable	occasion,	perhaps	by	invitation	to
a	 typical	 afternoon	 or	 evening	 at	 the	 Home,	 be	 persuaded	 to	make
substantial	 contributions	 (she	 is	 also	 president	 of	 a	 large	 women’s
organization	 in	Berlin).	Anyway,	 she	 is	 staying	 in	Prague	until	 early
November;	Max	is	going	to	talk	to	her	on	Tuesday,	and	then	I	will	let
you	know.

Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	October	22,	1916,	7	o’clock

Dearest,	quite	improbably	early	in	the	morning,	and	moreover	after	a
bad	night.	But	I	am	going	to	the	country	with	Ottla.	Not	to	keep	the
Feast	 of	 Tabernacles,	 merely	 to	 see	 a	 former	 schoolteacher	 of	 hers.
With	regard	to	Ottla:	I	never	intended	to	make	an	exalted	example	of
her;	 I	merely	mentioned	 her	 good,	 partly	 excellent	 qualities	 as	 they
strike	one	compared	with	her	mother’s.	I	never	meant	to	conceal	that
at	 the	 same	 time	 she	may	well	 be	 rather	 complacent,	 intellectually
calculating,	 and	 other	 things	 besides,	 although	 in	 view	 of	 my	 own
position	I	have	little	right	either	to	praise	or	to	blame.

Kind	regards,	Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	October	23,	1916

Dearest,	your	Thursday	letter	arrived	today.	In	view	of	your	frequent
complaints	 about	 lack	 of	 news,	 I	 should	 be	 glad	 to	 know	what	 you
have	actually	received,	since	for	a	long	time	now,	with	the	exception
of	 last	 Friday,	 I	 have	 been	 writing	 daily.—As	 far	 as	 the	 old
arrangement	with	 Felix	 is	 concerned,	 you	 guessed	 right.	Actually,	 it
was	 not	 very	 difficult,	 considering	 how	 the	 question	 was	 put.	 And
now	 you	 threaten	 me?	 Fortunately	 the	 thought	 of	 being	 comforted
alarms	 me	 almost	 more	 than	 being	 threatened.	 Your	 threat,	 Felice,
will	be	impossible	to	carry	out,	except	with	the	help	of	a	strait	jacket.
And	 surely	you	would	not	do	 that;	 instead,	 for	better	or	worse,	 you



will	leave	me	as	I	am.	It	was	lovely	in	the	country	yesterday.	Over	the
years	I	have	secretly	changed,	without	realizing	it,	from	a	city-dweller
into	 a	 countryman,	 or	 something	 very	 like	 it.	 We	 went	 to	 a	 God-
forsaken	 place—very	 rural,	 very	 beautiful—to	 see	 a	 schoolteacher
who	lives	there,	happy	and	contented,	on	about	600	kronen	a	year.	To
stick	 to	 the	 facts,	 she	 is	 a	 university	 student	who	 teaches	 privately,
has	a	temporary	job	at	the	school,	earns	a	further	50	kronen	a	month
by	giving	German	lessons,	and	is	 lucky	enough	to	be	 living	rent-free
for	 the	 first	6	months.	She	 teaches	55	children,	boys	and	girls	of	10
and	11.—By	the	way,	did	the	Insel	“Schlemihl”	and	the	puzzle	book
ever	reach	you?

Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	October	24,	1916

Dearest,	 nothing	 again	 today.—In	 yesterday’s	 letter	 the	 following
passage	gave	me	particular	pleasure:	“You	are	a	man	who	sees	himself
so	clearly	that	being	alone	is	bound	to	make	you	more	depressed	than
you	 are	 otherwise.”	 By	which	 you	mean	 that	 being	 alone,	 or	 to	 be
precise,	 calmly	 trying	 to	 see	 myself	 clearly	 (man’s	 great	 privilege),
acquiring	 insight	 into	 myself,	 is	 bound	 to	 depress	 me.	 So	 it	 looks
pretty	bad	inside	me!	Is	that	what	you	meant?	You	would	be	right.—
By	the	way,	there	is	someone	here	who	is	my	judge	(in	Marienbad	I
did	 just	 mention	 her	 remarks,	 according	 to	 which	 I	 am	 amoral).90
Yesterday	I	heard	of	her	again;	a	few	days	ago	she	is	supposed	to	have
said,	firstly,	that	I	am	unnatural—that	whatever	I	say	is	based	not	on
impulse,	 but	 on	 the	 calculated	 considerations	 of	 the	 effect;	 and
secondly	 that	 I	 am	 not	 a	 good	 man.	 The	 girl	 who	 said	 that	 is
intelligent,	and	at	first	I	really	felt	as	though	I	were	hearing	something
quite	pertinent.—So	all	the	girls	went	on	the	outing,	Hanff	included?
—Has	your	chief’s	vacation	been	extended?—I	still	cannot	give	you	a
definite	 date	 for	 the	 reading.	 Renewed	 difficulties.—I	 got	 them	 to
send	you	4	little	songbooks	published	by	Insel	Verlag,	very	nice	little
books.	As	well	as	a	Blauweiss91	songbook.—You	are	taking	a	Fröbel92
course	 instead	 of	 a	 course	 on	 religion?—What	 are	 the	 fairy-tale
evenings	like?—Who	conducts	the	Foerster	course?

Franz



[POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Prague,	October	25,	1916]
Dearest,	your	Saturday	 letter	arrived	 today.	So	 the	girls	do	 take	you
away	 from	me	 to	 some	 extent.	 I	would	 hold	 it	 against	 them	 if	 they
didn’t	give	you	back	to	me	a	thousandfold.	No	more	today,	there	are
various	urgent,	nerve-racking	jobs	for	me	to	do.

Franz

Max	had	a	word	with	Frau	Hauschner	yesterday	and	announced
your	 visit.	 For	 the	 time	 being,	 she	 merely	 wants	 to	 contribute
from	afar,	but	 if	 she	 is	asked	personally	and	cordially	 to	one	of
your	 evenings,	 one	 may	 be	 able	 to	 enlist	 her	 support	 in	 other
ways	as	well.

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	October	26,	[1916]

Dearest,	 your	 letters	 of	 Monday	 and	 Tuesday	 arrived	 today.	 Once
again,	 after	 a	 surprisingly	 long	 spell	 almost	 entirely	 free	 from
headaches,	they	find	me	in	a	very	bad	state.	Provided	it	is	temporary	I
will	 gladly	 put	 up	 with	 it.—Nothing	 that	 normally	 constitutes	 an
outing	 was	 omitted	 from	 yours;	 instead,	 a	 number	 of	 things	 not
usually	 included	in	outings	were	added,	and	this	may	have	been	the
reason	 for	 its	 success.	 No,	 you	 haven’t	 told	 me	 anything	 about
Fräulein	Blumstein.	However,	the	pictures	will	now	make	everything
clear.—Well,	the	reading	will	take	place	on	Friday,	November	10th,	at
8	 o’clock;	 tomorrow	 I	 will	 write	 and	 tell	 you	 the	 exact	 time	 of	my
arrival	 in	Munich;	 please	 let	me	 know	when	 you	 are	 due	 to	 arrive,
and	where	you	will	be	staying.	The	program	has	now	been	definitely
decided;	but	it	still	contains	one	small	snag	(nothing	to	do	with	me),
though	 it	may	 exist	 only	 in	my	 own	 overanxious	 eyes	 and	 not	 turn
into	a	major	obstacle.—It	really	does	seem	too	much	that	you	should
attend	a	regular	course	of	lectures	as	well.	And	lectures	on	Strindberg
at	that!	We	are	his	contemporaries	and	his	successors.	One	has	only	to
close	one’s	eyes	and	one’s	own	blood	delivers	lectures	on	Strindberg.
All	the	same,	do	drop	me	a	line	now	and	again	about	these	lectures	if
you	really	do	attend	them.—I	have	not	spoken	to	Frau	Hauschner,	she
doesn’t	know	me;	but	Max,	who	is	much	loved	by	her,	has	announced
your	visit.



Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	October	27,	1916

Dearest,	thank	you	for	Wednesday’s	kind	words.	Fundamentally	I	have
little	 doubt	 that	 we	 are	 in	 agreement	 on	 this	 subject,	 and	 will
continue	to	agree;	even	so,	it	may	be	a	good	thing	from	time	to	time
to	ring	this	bell,	this	bell	at	our	door.—So	the	reading	will	now	take
place	 on	 November	 10th.	 Max	 and	 I	 were	 supposed	 to	 have	 an
evening	each.	But	since	Max’s	application	for	leave	for	these	two	days
and	 for	 that	 purpose	 was	 turned	 down	 and	 he	 can’t	 go,	 I	 have
undertaken	to	read	a	number	of	his	poems	as	well	or	as	badly	as	I	can.
He	should	not	be	altogether	absent	from	that	series	of	readings;	better
to	appear	imperfectly	delivered	than	not	appear	at	all.	The	only	thing
that	could	conceivably	prevent	my	reading	now	would	be	difficulties
the	Munich	censorship	might	make—though	I	can’t	imagine	what	they
could	 object	 to.—To	 attend	 Milan’s	 reading	 on	 the	 eve	 of	 your
departure	would	 surely	 be	 overdoing	 it.	 First	 of	 all	 he	 gives	 several
readings	 each	 winter;	 secondly,	 however	 great	 his	 talent,	 a	 good
night’s	 sleep	 is	 worth	 as	 much;	 and	 thirdly,	 you	 shouldn’t	 come
straight	 from	 his	 lecture—with	 extravagant	 expectations—to	 mine;
that	 is,	 if	 you	 intend	 to	 come	 to	 it	 at	 all,	 which	 still	 has	 to	 be
considered.	I	arrive	in	Munich	at	6:24,	and	leave	again	on	Sunday	at	7
o’clock.—The	mailman	happy	now?	But	he	did	do	me	an	injustice.

Franz

[IN	THE	MARGIN]	Still	reading	Foerster?

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	October	28,	1916

Dearest,	 tormented	 again	 by	 nights	 and	 head,	 or	 head	 and	 nights,
whichever	you	prefer;	they	join	hands	to	torment	me.—The	other	day
I	read	Ritual	Murder	in	Hungary,	a	tragedy	by	Zweig;93	its	supernatural
scenes	 are	 as	 contrived	 and	 feeble	 as	 I	 would	 have	 expected	 from
what	I	know	of	Zweig’s	work.	The	terrestrial	scenes	on	the	other	hand
are	intensely	alive,	taken	no	doubt	largely	from	the	excellent	records



of	 the	 case.	 Nevertheless	 one	 cannot	 quite	 distinguish	 between	 the
two	worlds;	he	has	identified	himself	with	the	case	and	is	now	under
its	spell.	I	no	longer	see	him	the	way	I	used	to.	At	one	point	I	had	to
stop	reading,	sit	down	on	the	sofa,	and	weep.	It’s	years	since	I	wept.

Franz

[IN	 THE	 MARGIN]	Won’t	we	be	 on	 the	 same	 train	 for	 the	 last	 part	 of	 the
journey?

I	am	traveling	via	Eger.
[POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Prague,	October	29,	1916]
Dearest,	your	Thursday	letter	arrived	today.	You	are	right,	we	simply
have	to	meet	and	talk	at	last.	If	only	the	reading	were	certain	to	take
place!	 I	have	no	choice,	other	 than	that	which	 I	 submitted,	nor	do	 I
wish	to	read	anything	else.	So	I	should	have	to	decline	if	it	were	not
accepted	 by	 the	 authorities.	 And	 that	 is	 why	 I	 dread	 this	 possible
difficulty,	 which	 otherwise	 would	 hardly	 be	 worth	 mentioning.	 It
would	be	a	very	good	thing	if	we	were	to	join	each	other	on	the	actual
journey,	 very	 good	 for	 me,	 for	 in	 that	 case	 you	 would	 be	 dragged
across,	dragged	down,	 to	 the	 third	class.—I	 spoke	 to	Feigl	 the	other
day;	he	has	been	called	up.	Since	 they	have	 let	 their	apartment	and
given	 the	post	office	an	 incorrect	 forwarding	address,	your	 letter,	as
well	 as	 others,	 never	 reached	 them.—Why	 do	 you	 need	 literature
about	 adult	 education?	 I	 don’t	 know	 how	 to	 get	 hold	 of	 it.—The
photographs	 haven’t	 arrived,	 hope	 you	 didn’t	 take	 them	 with	 the
wrapping	of	the	film!

Franz

October	30,	1916
Dearest,	 not	 a	 letter,	 please	 don’t	 insist	 upon	 a	 letter;	 if	 I	 had
something	as	commendable	to	report	about	myself	as	you	had	in	your
last	 letter,	how	my	pen	would	race	to	let	you	know!	But	as	it	 is——
My	 life	 is	 made	 up	 of	 two	 parts,	 the	 one	 feeds	 on	 your	 life	 with
bulging	cheeks	and	could	in	itself	be	happy	and	a	great	man;	but	the
other	part	is	like	a	cobweb	come	adrift;	being	free	of	tension,	free	of
headaches	is	its	supreme	though	not	too	frequent	joy.	What	can	we	do
about	 this	 second	 part?	 Soon	 it	 will	 be	 two	 years	 since	 it	 did	 any



work,	and	yet	it	consists	of	nothing	but	the	capacity	and	longing	for
this	work.	Well,	soon,	10	or	11	days	from	now,	I	do	hope	we	shall	be
together;	this	happy	anticipation,	however,	creates	too	much	anxiety
for	much	writing.	May	nothing	happen	to	prevent	it!
Enclosed,	a	number	of	oddments:
1.)	 Picture	 of	 Ottla,	 an	 extraordinarily	 bad	 one,	 though.	 The
touched-up	teeth,	and	the	opening	at	the	corner	of	her	mouth,	are	not
even	its	worst	defects.
2.)	 Buber’s	 letter	 in	which,	 on	 re-reading	 it	 today,	 I	 really	 cannot
find	anything	remarkable.	I	don’t	know	why	I	ever	mentioned	it	and
am	sending	 it	only	because	you,	misled	by	my	remarks,	keep	asking
for	it.
3.)	An	appeal,	 as	 an	 example	of	 that	 other	part’s	 activities.94	 You
will	find	my	name	among	the	signatories;	originally	I	was	meant	to	be
high	up	on	 the	organizing	 committee,	 but	 then,	 and	 indeed	without
too	much	effort,	my	name	slipped	into	the	large	group.	The	text	(like
that	of	so	many	others)	is	also	mine.	Well,	no	more	about	this.
4.)	The	program	for	the	readings.	On	the	last	page	but	two	you	will
see	 the	 “Judgment”	 advertised.	 But	 Wolff—incidentally	 without
having	 let	 me	 know—again	 seems	 to	 be	 trying	 to	 suppress	 it.95
However,	since	I	myself	am	lifeless	and	merely	listen	to	life	throbbing
in	my	temples,	it	doesn’t	matter.
Don’t	worry,	 dearest,	 about	my	 judge.	 The	 reassuring	 (and	 if	 you
like,	the	disturbing)	thing	about	it	is	that	she	gets	her	facts	from	5	to
10	brief	conversations,	all	of	which	took	place	at	least	6	months	ago.
See	you	soon,	see	you	soon!

Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	October	31,	1916

Dearest,	 during	 the	 last	 few	 days	 I	 was	 too	 busy	 to	write	 from	 the
office.	Your	 last	 letter	was	dated	Friday,	 today	 there	was	nothing.—
Needless	to	say,	with	you	in	charge	the	children’s	 library	should	not
continue	 to	 be	 so	 inadequately	 stocked;	 so	 today,	 as	 a	 small	 basic
start,	 I	 had	 Schaffstein’s	 little	 blue	 books96	 sent	 to	 you.	 They	 are
bound	 in	 boards,	 like	 your	 “Peter	 Schlemihl”;	 clothbound	 would	 of
course	be	better,	but	 too	expensive.	Perhaps	 they	could	be	bound	 in
one	of	the	Home’s	workshops	before	being	used.	These	are	books	for



all	 age-groups;	 overcautious	 segregation	 surely	 is	 unnecessary.	 As	 a
matter	 of	 fact,	 for	 boys	 Schaffstein’s	 green	 books,	my	 favorites,	 are
best,	but	I	didn’t	want	to	send	them	all	at	once,	so	I	will	let	you	have
these	later.	Among	them,	for	example,	is	one	book	that	affects	me	so
deeply	that	I	feel	it	is	about	myself,	or	as	if	it	were	the	book	of	rules
for	my	life,	rules	I	avoid,	or	have	avoided	(a	feeling	I	often	have,	by
the	way);	the	book	is	called	The	Sugar	Baron,	and	its	 final	chapter	 is
the	most	 important.97	Actually,	 it	 is	very	difficult	 to	decide	between
one	 children’s	 book	 and	 another.	 If	 I	 were	 asked	 to	 name	 the	 best
children’s	 books	 from	my	 own	 experience,	 I	would	 probably	 choose
the	 little	 volumes	 by	Hoffmann,98	 obvious	 trash.	 How	 beautiful	 the
books	we’re	reading	new	will	seem	in	the	next	world!
I	will	tell	you	my	actual	suggestions	for	the	library	in	due	course.

Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	November	1,	1916

Dearest,	 what’s	 this?	 You	 are	 now	 threatening	 not	 to	 come?	 After
these	endless	minor	difficulties,	of	which	now	only	one	remains,	there
is	 to	 be	 this	major	 one?	 This	must	 not	 happen.	 The	 decision	 about
your	 chief’s	 vacation	 must	 surely	 have	 been	 made	 ages	 ago.—The
photographs	 and	 your	 Monday	 letter	 arrived	 today.	 What	 a	 lovely
group	in	the	woods!	So	those	are	your	9	girls,	and	Hanff	is	there,	too.
This	time	S.	is	the	only	one	without	a	smile.	The	prettiest	would	seem
to	be	the	coquettish	one	on	the	left,	in	the	belted	blouse.	The	picture
is	somewhat	marred	by	the	snaillike	pose	adopted	by	the	one	in	front.
Big	 girls,	 incidentally,	 and,	with	 the	 exception	 of	 2	 or	 3,	 they	 have
rather	typical	 faces.	A	face,	however,	can	be	fully	grasped	only	with
the	help	of	some	1000	pictures.	Your	girls	are	also	in	the	two	dancing
pictures;	with	an	effort	they	can	even	be	identified,	but	they	do	look
quite	 different.	 The	 picture	 of	 you	 in	 the	 group	 is	 so	 good	 that	 it
makes	up	for	the	poor	and	rather	unintelligible	one	with	the	flowers.
You	will	have	to	explain	the	5th	picture,	in	which	S.	is	the	only	one	I
recognize.—I	don’t	know	if	I	can	get	hold	of	a	Hanukkah	play.	But	of
course	 I	 will	 try	 at	 once.—What	 do	 you	 think	 of	 the	 humiliating
treatment	(assuming	a	lie	to	be	merely	a	humiliation)	I	receive	in	that
paper99	 I	 sent	 you?	 It	 is	 by	 no	means	 the	worst	 humiliation	 I	 have
suffered,	there	are	worse	on	all	sides,	but	it	is	bad	enough.—No	more



threats	about	not	coming!
Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	November	3,	1916

Dearest,	 so	 it	 was	 merely	 a	 threat,	 in	 order	 to	 frighten	 me.	 Which
indeed	 it	 did.	 But	 now	 you	 are	 coming,	 after	 all.	 The	 clearance
actually	hasn’t	 come	 through,	but	 the	manuscripts	did	not	 get	 there
until	 Monday.	 I	 am	 still	 nervous	 about	 it,	 and	 to	 tell	 the	 truth,
however	harmless	the	nature	of	it	is,	I	cannot	imagine	that	permission
will	 be	 granted.	 Anyway,	 in	 the	 event	 of	 difficulties	 I	 will	 send	 a
telegram;	meanwhile	I	am	happy	at	the	thought	of	seeing	you	so	soon.
Our	trains	join—unfortunately	the	large	timetable	is	not	at	hand,	and
I	 am	merely	 going	 by	 the	 map—somewhere	 around	Wiesau,	 which
means	between	1	and	2	P.M.	A	great	saving	of	time	if	we	can	meet	on
the	 train.	Needless	 to	say,	 I	will	also	stay	at	 the	Bayerische	Hof	 (for
superstitious	 reasons	with	 the	 same	 proviso	 as	 above).—I	 doubt	 if	 I
can	get	hold	of	a	Hanukkah	play.	The	only	girl	I	had	hoped	might	be
able	 to	 provide	 something	 (she	 rehearsed	 a	 play	 last	 year	 with	 the
children	 in	 our	 local	 East	 European	 Jewish	Kindergarten,	 I	 took	my
nephew	 there;	 incidentally	 the	play,	meant	 for	 very	 young	 children,
was	quite	inadequate,	but	the	girl	herself	 is	exceptional)—well,	even
this	 girl	 hasn’t	 got	 anything.	 The	 Jüdische	Verlag	 is	 supposed	 to	 be
bringing	 out	 a	Hanukkah	 book;	 perhaps	 they	would	 let	 you	 see	 the
galley	proofs.

Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	November	5,	1916

Dearest,	 early	morning	 again,	 prior	 to	 an	 excursion	 to	 the	 country.
There	 was	 nothing	 from	 you	 yesterday,	 and	 I	 must	 admit	 I	 didn’t
write,	either.	My	journey	is	becoming	more	and	more	probable	every
day.	In	any	case	on	Wednesday	or	Thursday	I	will	send	you	a	telegram
either	with	the	lovely	words:	“We	are	going”	or	the	sad	word:	“No.”

Franz



To	Felice	Bauer’s	mother
November	14,	1916

Dear	Mother,
Since	 Felice	 has	 told	 me	 that	 my	 letter	 from	 Marienbad	 was
favorably	 received,	 I	 can	 now	 write	 you	 my	 birthday	 letter	 with	 a
lighter	heart	than	before.	As	I	have	often	observed,	heard,	and	said,	I
am	not	altogether	easy	to	get	on	with,	not	even	for	myself;	so	if	you	of
all	people	make	the	effort	to	do	so—you	who	are	prepared	to	entrust
your	daughter	to	me,	and	are	therefore	entitled	to	make	nothing	but
demands—it	 is	 all	 the	more	 generous.	 So	 please	 (this	 is	where	 self-
interest	enters	even	into	birthday	wishes)	continue	to	be	patient	with
me	 in	 future;	may	you	maintain	 for	Felice,	 and	 through	her	 for	me,
your	 almost	 youthful	 vitality,	 which	 is	 how	 I	 remember	 you,	 and
remain	with	us	for	a	long	time	to	come.——
I	 kiss	 your	 hand	 respectfully,	 and	 send	 kind	 regards	 to	 Erna	 and
Toni.

Yours,	Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	November	21,	1916

Dearest,	not	a	single	word,	for	days	and	days.	Why?	Can’t	you	see	the
point	of	my	last	postcards?100	Surely	they	deal	with	the	most	essential
problems	 of	 living	 together.	 To	 stick	 to	 this	 one	 point:	 I	 cannot	 let
you,	you	of	all	people,	go	on	accusing	me	of	 selfishness,	 so	casually
and	 as	 a	 matter	 of	 course,	 and	 with	 the	 ever-present	 threat	 of	 it
continuing	 indefinitely.	 It	 does	 affect	 me	 deeply,	 because	 it	 is	 just.
What	is	unjust	is	that	it	should	be	you,	you	of	all	people,	who	accuse
me,	 thereby	denying—far	 less	perhaps	by	deeds	 than	by	words—my
right	 to	 this	kind	of	 selfishness,	which	 is	directed	 less,	 infinitely	 less
toward	the	person	than	the	thing.	To	be	convinced	that	I	draw	the	line
in	 the	right	place	 in	 this	 respect	does	of	course	presuppose	 that	you
have	confidence	in	me.	Anyway,	my	sense	of	guilt	is	strong	enough	at
any	time,	it	doesn’t	need	feeding	from	outside;	my	constitution,	on	the
other	hand,	is	not	strong	enough	to	gulp	down	this	kind	of	food	very
often.

Franz



[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	November	23,	1916

Dearest,	 that’s	 just	 what	 I	 think,	 too;	 how	 else	 could	 I	 continue	 to
exist	in	my	present	state	(headaches	included)?	Although	I’m	far	from
convinced	that	quarrels	of	this	kind	(that	ghastly	pastry	shop!)101	will
not	 occur	 again,	 at	 least	 they	won’t	 have	 the	 tension	of	 the	hurried
meeting,	 that	 vague	 nightmarish	 transitory	 feeling	 which	 adds	 to
bitterness,	 and	 so	 will	 be	 borne	 merely	 as	 part	 of	 ordinary	 human
misery.	You	will	 strike	 the	stone,	and	the	stone	will	be	only	slightly
scratched.	If	 it	does	not	crumble	prematurely,	 it	will	stand	it,	 just	as
the	hand	will	have	to	stand	it.—What	occupies	me	almost	entirely	at
the	moment—omitting	today’s	headaches	(rare	since	Munich)—is	the
thought	of	my	move,	and	the	small	but,	considering	my	usual	negative
frame	of	mind,	 largely	positive	hopes	attaching	to	 it.	My	visit	 to	the
renting	agent	was	 in	 itself	an	achievement	not	 to	be	despised.	Since
then	 3	 women	 have	 been	 hovering	 around	 me	 with	 far	 more
friendliness	than	I	deserve:	the	owner	of	the	agency,	the	caretaker	at
the	 house	 I	 intend	 to	 live	 in,	 and	 the	 maid	 of	 the	 people	 whose
apartment	 I	 propose	 to	 take.	 Yesterday	 my	 mother	 joined	 them	 as
well,	in	the	kindest	possible	way.	I	will	divulge	no	more	until	the	day
after	 tomorrow,	 when	 the	 decision	 will	 be	 made.—Tomorrow	 the
books	will	be	dispatched	to	you.

Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	November	24,	1916

This	morning	 I	 started	 a	 postcard	 to	 you,	was	 interrupted,	 and	now
cannot	find	the	card	I	started.	Normally	that	kind	of	thing	happens	to
me	only	with	files.	 It’s	annoying.—Dearest,	 it	didn’t	happen	the	way
you	think	it	did.	It	seems	you	really	did	not	get	my	birthday	telegram.
Deliveries	nowadays	are	too	unreliable.	I	sent	it	on	the	evening	of	the
17th.	It	read:	“Embraces	from	afar.”—The	wording	may	have	been	too
unusual	for	it	to	be	dispatched.	Perhaps	I	will	complain	about	it.—For
the	 moment	 my	 apartment	 is	 again	 my	 main	 preoccupation,	 and	 a
rather	 sad	 one	 at	 that.	 Once	 more	 the	 decision	 has	 had	 to	 be
postponed	for	a	few	days,	and	now	it	is	less	certain	that	I	shall	get	it.
Here,	mind	you,	is	a	2-room	apartment,	without	kitchen,	that	seems	in



every	 detail	 to	 live	 up	 to	 even	my	wildest	 dreams.	 Failure	 to	 get	 it
would	be	hard	to	bear.	Though	this	apartment	might	not	restore	my
inner	peace,	it	would	at	least	give	me	a	chance	to	work;	I	dare	say	the
gates	of	paradise	would	not	promptly	fly	open,	but	in	the	wall	I	might
find	 two	 slits	 for	 my	 eyes.—I	 read	 a	 letter	 today	 from	 Private
Lehmann	 to	Max,	 in	 which	 he	 pays	 particular	 tribute	 to	 your	 hard
work.—Christmas?	I	won’t	be	able	to	leave.

Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,	December	4,	1916]

Dearest,	your	earlier	letter,	the	one	that	was	returned	to	you,	arrived
today.	 It	 seems	we	are	becoming	more	 trustworthy.	My	views	about
Christmas	 remain	 unchanged;	 I	 know	 I	 shall	 feel	 a	 twinge	 when	 I
finally	 hear	 that	we	 are	 not	 to	meet,	 but	 I	will	 not	 doubt	 the	 basic
rightness	of	my	opinion.—I	am	greatly	distressed	by	your	headaches.
Have	you	and	I	together	been	given	but	a	single	share	of	calm,	so	that
when	 things	 with	 me	 are	 slightly	 calmer,	 your	 share	 is	 instantly
diminished?	And	the	reasons?	Surely	the	uncertainties	were	no	greater
a	month	ago	than	they	are	now.	And	the	Home?	Doesn’t	it	hold	your
interest,	 give	 you	 strength?—It	 is	 no	 longer	 possible	 for	me	 to	 read
your	 friend’s	play.	Max	 sent	 it	 off	 some	days	 ago	before	 I	 had	 even
heard	of	it.	He	doesn’t	think	it	has	any	merit.	Of	course	I	should	like
to	 have	 read	 it,	 since	 you	wanted	me	 to,	 but	 now	 that	 it	 has	 gone,
there	is	no	point	in	asking	for	it	back;	my	opinion	of	it,	let	alone	my
help,	would	certainly	be	of	no	use	to	the	author.	Incidentally,	Max	has
recently	 been	 overwhelmed	 with	 requests	 of	 this	 kind,	 so	 may	 not
have	read	it	too	carefully.

Franz

[POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Prague,	December	7,	1916]
Dearest,	 nothing	 for	 several	 days	 now.	 You	mustn’t	 think	 that	 I	 am
living	 in	 a	 permanent	 state	 of	 bliss.	 Perhaps	 the	 relative	 calm	 is
merely	an	accumulation	of	discontent,	which	one	night,	like	last	night
for	 example,	 bursts	 forth	 in	 such	 a	 way	 as	 to	 make	 one	 howl	 and
spend	 the	next	day	 (today)	wandering	about	 like	a	member	of	one’s
own	funeral	procession.—You	ask	about	notices	of	the	reading.	I	have



had	 only	 one	 more,	 from	 the	 Münchner-Augsburger	 Zeitung.	 It	 is
somewhat	kinder	than	the	first,	but	since	it	is	in	complete	agreement
with	the	basic	opinions	of	the	other,	its	kinder	tone	merely	reinforces
the	actual	grandiose	failure	of	the	evening.	I	am	not	even	trying	to	get
hold	 of	 the	 other	 notices.102	 In	 any	 case	 I	 have	 to	 admit	 that	 these
opinions	are	justified,	indeed	almost	true.	I	have	abused	my	writing	as
a	means	of	getting	to	Munich,	where	otherwise	I	have	no	intellectual
ties,	and	after	2	years	of	not	writing	had	the	incredible	impudence	to
read	 in	public,	while	 for	 the	past	 year	 and	a	half	 in	Prague	 I	didn’t
read	 a	word	 even	 to	my	best	 friends.	 Incidentally,	 back	 in	 Prague	 I
remembered	Rilke’s	words.	After	some	extremely	kind	remarks	about
“The	Stoker,”	he	went	on	to	say	that	neither	Metamorphosis	nor	“In	the
Penal	Colony”	had	achieved	the	same	effect.	This	observation	may	not
be	easy	to	understand,	but	it	is	discerning.103

Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	December	8,	1916

Dearest,	the	postcard	in	which	you	write	about	your	chief’s	Christmas
travels	 arrived	 after	 a	 long	 delay;	 otherwise	 no	 news	 for	 ages.	 And
still	getting	headaches,	according	to	that	postcard.	And	now	you	have
lapsed	 into	 silence.	 The	 Home?	 The	 Hanukkah	 play?	 Before	 long	 I
shall	 send	you	a	number	of	Jewish	books.	Did	you	get	 the	parcel	of
books?	Tomorrow	I	will	mail	the	parcel	for	Muzzi.	No,	perhaps	I	had
better	wait	for	further	instructions	from	you.	So	far	I	have	collected:	2
books,	1	game,	sweets,	Karlsbad	biscuits,	chocolate.	Beyond	this,	my
imagination	fails	me.	Shouldn’t	a	little	dress,	or	something	of	the	kind,
be	included?	But	for	this	I	would	need	precise	instructions;	actually,	I
would	 get	 Ottla	 to	 choose	 it	 for	 me.	 Yes	 indeed,	 cocoa	 should	 be
added;	 so	 I	will	get	 some	cocoa	as	well,	and	 then	wait	 to	hear	 from
you.—I	am	living	in	Ottla’s	house.104	And	better	than	at	any	time	in
the	past	 two	years.	Small	 improvements	are	 still	being	made,	 so	 the
accommodation	is	gradually	approaching	perfection.	This	it	will	never
achieve,	because	for	me	perfection	would	mean	being	there	all	night.
As	it	is,	I	have	been	going	home	when	the	good	hours	start,	at	first	at
8,	 then	at	8:30,	and	now	even	after	9.	A	 strange	 feeling,	 locking	up
one’s	house	on	a	starlit	night	 in	this	narrow	street.	The	other	day	at
about	 this	 hour	my	 neighbor	 (Dr.	 Knoll)	 stood	 in	 the	middle	 of	 the



street	with	his	St.	Nicholas105	bag	of	sweets	and	waited	for	the	local
children	to	appear.

Kind	regards,	Franz

[POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Prague,	December	9,	1916]
Dearest,	your	letter	about	the	glove	arrived	today,	the	9th.	But	since
your	relative	is	leaving	on	the	10th,	I	assume	there	would	be	no	point
in	sending	it	there,	especially	as	I	won’t	be	getting	it	before	Monday.	I
will	mail	 it	 on	Monday,	 possibly	 as	 a	 “sample	without	 value.”	 That
should	be	all	right.—Does	so	short	a	letter	mean	headaches?	As	long
as	I	don’t	actually	read	the	word,	I	cannot	believe	they	exist,	such	is
my	confidence	in	your	physical	health	(though	no	less	than	the	other
kind)—or	 does	 the	 brevity	mean	 anger?	 I	 really	 couldn’t	 help	 it.—I
continue	 to	 live	 in	 the	 little	 house,	 but	 am	 going	 to	 rearrange	 my
timetable	 and	 stay	 there	 further	 into	 the	 night.—There	 have	 been	 a
number	of	worthwhile	 lectures	 in	Berlin—Milan,	Borchardt,	Blümner
(Lucie	by	Essig);106	 but	whenever	 I	 read	about	 them	 it	 is	 too	 late.—
Now	 instead	 of	 going	 to	 my	 home,	 I	 have	 to	 act	 as	 recorder	 at	 a
meeting.

Franz

[POSTCARD.	POSTMARK:	Prague,	December	13,	1916]
Dearest,	no,	it	isn’t	going	to	be	as	bad	as	all	that,	and	two	days	later
you	probably	wouldn’t	have	put	it	that	way.	There	is	no	word	about
you	being	free	of	headaches.	I	am	still	 in	the	little	house,	sometimes
things	 go	 quite	 well,	 other	 times	 not	 so	well,	 one	 has	 to	 strike	 the
average.—I	have	not	read	the	Flaubert,	but	I	shall	have	to	read	it	soon
in	 order	 to	 test	 your	 knowledge	 of	 human	 nature.—Alas,	 the	 list	 of
Books	for	Juveniles	has	not	arrived	yet,	but	it	should	be	coming	soon.
Tomorrow,	 by	 the	way,	 I	 am	 going	 to	 send	 a	 book	 for	 you	 to	 read
aloud.—I	have	now	got	the	gloves,	or	rather	the	material,	but	sending
it	 is	 not	 so	 easy.	 Next	week,	 however,	 someone	 I	 know	 is	 going	 to
Germany	 and	 will	 take	 it.—I	 am	 awaiting	 instructions	 about	 the
parcel	for	Muzzi.

Franz

[POSTCARD]



[Prague,]	December	14,	1916
Dearest,	yes,	the	books.	They	will	be	with	you	very	soon.	The	Jewish
booksellers	are	so	peculiar,	arrangements	for	dispatch	are	peculiar,	it
takes	ages.	But	I	am	hoping	to	be	able	to	send	them	off	before	the	end
of	the	week.—Yesterday	I	sent	you	Little	Dorrit.	I’m	sure	you	know	it.
How	could	we	have	overlooked	Dickens!	One	probably	could	not	read
the	whole	of	it	with	the	children,	but	parts	of	it	are	sure	to	give	you
and	 them	 a	 great	 deal	 of	 pleasure.—Good	 luck	 for	 the	 Hanukkah
evening.	On	this	occasion	(I	have	no	idea	of	the	date)	there	are	sure	to
be	photographs,	 to	which	 I	am	entitled.—In	my	house	 I	am	battling
with	all	kinds	of	difficulties	which	I	create	one	day,	only	to	cross	them
out	the	next	with	ten	times	the	energy	it	took	to	create	them.	But	it’s
wonderful	 living	 there,	 wonderful	 strolling	 home	 around	 midnight,
down	the	old	castle	steps,107	into	the	city.

Franz

[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	December	20,	1916

Dearest,	now	don’t	be	sad	if	you	don’t	hear	from	me.	This	is	truly	not
as	 I	 would	 want	 it,	 it	 worries	 me,	 and	 at	 the	 moment	 I	 am	 so
vulnerable.	This	is	pure	selfishness	which	transmits	itself	to	the	other
soul.	All	the	same,	please	don’t	be	sad.	The	absence	of	news	is	at	least
no	 worse	 than	 the	 accumulation	 of	 letters.—My	 life	 is	 monotonous
and	 proceeds	 within	 the	 prison	 of	 my	 innate,	 as	 it	 were	 threefold
misfortune.	 When	 I	 am	 unproductive	 I	 am	 unhappy;	 when	 I	 am
productive	 there	 isn’t	 enough	 time;	 and	when	 I	 count	 on	 the	 future
then	at	once	there	is	the	fear,	a	variety	of	fears,	that	I	shall	be	more
than	 ever	 unable	 to	 work.	 An	 exquisitely	 calculated	 hell.	 Yet—and
this	 is	 the	 main	 point—not	 without	 its	 good	 moments.—Muzzi’s
present	 is	going	to	be	especially	nice	this	 time;	Ottla	carried	out	the
commission.	 It’s	 silly	 the	 way	 I	 am	 always	 undecided	 about	 this
address,	 the	way	 you	 are	 about	my	 uncle’s.	 I	 hope	Azstalos	 utca	 2,
care	of	Frau	Guttmann,	is	correct.
The	 other	 day	 you	mentioned	 some	 kind	 of	 solution	 to	 our	main
problem.	Is	there	nothing	you	can	add	to	that?

Franz



[POSTCARD]
[Prague,]	December	22,	1916

Dearest,	no	news	for	some	days	now.	The	parcel	for	Muzzi	was	mailed
yesterday;	 nice	 things;	 there	 was	 but	 one	 snag—no	 suitable	 game
could	 be	 found,	 so	 a	 box	 of	 building	 bricks	 was	 sent.	 The	 rest,
however,	will	compensate	for	this	incompetence.	Yesterday	I	sent	you
the	list	of	Books	for	Juveniles,	and	today	a	children’s	book;	slowly	it
will	all	fall	into	place.	The	gloves,	however,	are	still	here.	That	friend
of	 mine	 is	 not	 leaving	 until	 next	 week.	 Once	 again	 I	 have	 housing
worries;	one	day	I	must	tell	you	all	about	them	in	chronological	order.
Otherwise,	 things	 with	 me	 vary;	 my	 health,	 at	 any	 rate,	 is	 better.
Yesterday	I	was	reminded	of	Munich;	Kölwel	sent	me	three	poems.108
No	doubt	they	spring	from	a	pure	and	in	many	ways	innocent	heart,
but	 they	 seemed	 to	 be	 better	 in	 Munich	 than	 they	 are	 here.	 With
regard	to	the	recently	mentioned	impudence109	(by	the	way,	I	like	the
name	 Blumstein	 as	 such:	 the	 gentle	 and	 the	 firm	 side	 by	 side;	 the
gentle,	 moreover,	 has	 sacrificed	 two	 of	 its	 letters	 in	 order	 to	 come
closer	to	the	firm110)—well,	 for	my	impudence	in	this	respect	I	have
been	 punished	 by	 a	 letter	 from	 the	 actor	 Löwy	 (I	 have	 often
mentioned	him	to	you).	He	is	now	having	great	success	in	Budapest,
and	 is	making	wild	 (and	 by	 no	means	 justified)	 accusations	 against
me,	saying	I	hadn’t	done	enough	for	him	here,	had	merely	trifled	with
him.

Franz

Franz	Kafka’s	mother	to	Felice	Bauer’s	mother
Prague,	December	31,	1916

My	dear	Anna,
The	 approaching	 New	 Year	 gives	 me	 once	 again	 the	 pleasant
opportunity	to	send	you	a	few	lines	and	at	the	same	time	to	convey	to
you	our	heartfelt	wishes	for	the	coming	year.	May	the	Almighty	bring
this	terrible	war	to	an	end,	so	that	our	hearts	and	minds	can	be	calm
again	and	life	once	more	have	pleasant	things	in	store	for	us	and	our
children.	 We	 are	 all	 well,	 thank	 God;	 working	 hard	 and	 looking
forward	 to	 the	 future	 with	 confidence.	 How	 are	 you	 and	 your
children?	I	think	of	you	all	very	often.	I	had	hoped	that	Felice	might
surprise	 us	 with	 a	 visit	 at	 Christmas,	 but	 probably	 she	 could	 not
manage	 to	 get	 away.	We	would	 all	 be	 very	 pleased	 to	 see	 her	 and



hope	she	will	come	very	soon.
Our	 sons-in-law	 are	 well,	 thank	 God—as	 well	 as	 one	 can	 be	 in
wartime.	How	 is	 Aunt	 Emilie?	Will	 you	 please	 give	 her	 our	 kindest
regards.
While	hoping	to	hear	good	news	of	you	before	long,	I	send	my	best
regards	and	remain	affectionately,

yours,	Julie	Kafka

Give	your	children	our	warmest	greetings	and	kiss	our	dear	Felice
for	 me.	 My	 husband	 and	 all	 the	 children	 send	 their	 kindest
regards.

[End	of	December	1916/beginning	of	January	1917]1
Dearest,	herewith	the	saga	of	my	apartment.	A	vast	subject.	It	scares
me;	I	won’t	be	able	to	cope	with	it.	Too	much	for	me.	I	can’t	describe
more	 than	 a	 thousandth	 part	 of	 it	 in	writing,	 and	won’t	 be	 able	 to
recall	more	than	a	thousandth	part	of	that,	and	of	this	I	won’t	succeed
in	 making	 clear	 to	 you	 more	 than	 a	 thousandth	 part,	 and	 so	 on.
Nevertheless	it	has	got	to	be	done,	I	want	to	hear	your	advice.	So	read
carefully,	and	advise	me	well.	You	are	acquainted	with	my	two	years
of	 suffering,	 insignificant	 compared	 to	 the	 world’s	 suffering	 during
that	period,	but	bad	enough	for	me.
A	 comfortable,	 pleasant	 corner	 room,2	 two	windows,	 a	 door	 onto
the	balcony.	A	view	over	any	number	of	roofs	and	churches.	Tolerable
neighbors,	since	with	a	little	ingenuity	I	never	have	to	see	them.	Noisy
street,	heavy	carts	first	thing	in	the	morning,	to	which	however	I	have
almost	 grown	 accustomed.	 And	 yet,	 for	 me,	 the	 room	 all	 but
uninhabitable.	Although	it	is	situated	at	the	end	of	a	long	hall	and	is
seemingly	quite	secluded,	the	house	is	built	of	concrete,	and	until	past
10	 o’clock	 I	 hear,	 or	 rather	 heard,	 the	 sighs	 of	 the	 neighbors,	 the
conversation	of	the	people	below,	and	now	and	then	a	crash	from	the
kitchen.	Moreover,	above	the	flimsy	ceiling	is	the	attic,	and	as	I	was
about	to	start	work	I	never	knew	which	evening	a	housemaid	would
choose	to	hang	up	the	washing	and	literally,	quite	innocently,	put	the
heel	of	her	boot	through	my	skull.	Occasionally	a	piano	could	also	be
heard,	and	 in	summer—from	the	semicircle	of	encroaching	houses—
singing,	 a	 violin,	 and	a	 gramophone.	Nothing	 approaching	 complete
silence	 until	 after	 11	 o’clock	 at	 night.	 No	 possibility	 of	 peace;	 total
disorientation;	 breeding	 ground	 for	 every	 kind	 of	 madness;	 ever-



increasing	weakness	and	hopelessness.	How	much	more	could	be	said
about	this,	but	let	us	get	on.
One	day	last	summer	Ottla	and	I	went	in	search	of	a	place	to	live;
although	 I	 no	 longer	 believed	 in	 the	 possibility	 of	 real	 peace	 and
quiet,	I	nevertheless	set	off	in	search.	We	saw	a	number	of	places	on
the	Malá	Strana,	and	I	kept	thinking,	if	only	there	were	a	quiet	hole	in
some	attic	 in	one	of	 the	old	palaces,	where	at	 last	one	could	stretch
out	 in	peace.	Nothing;	we	 found	nothing	 suitable.	 For	 fun	we	made
inquiries	 in	 the	 tiny	 little	 alley.	 Yes,	 a	 small	 house	 could	 be	 rented
from	November.	Ottla,	who	in	her	own	way	is	also	looking	for	peace
and	 quiet,	 fell	 in	 love	with	 the	 idea	 of	 renting	 this	 house.	 I,	 in	my
innate	weakness,	advised	her	against	 it.	The	idea	that	I	 too	could	be
there	 hardly	 entered	my	 head.	 So	 small,	 so	 dirty,	 so	 uninhabitable,
with	 every	kind	of	defect.	But	 she	 insisted.	When	 it	was	vacated	by
the	large	family	who	had	been	living	there,	she	had	it	painted,	bought
a	 few	 pieces	 of	 bamboo	 furniture	 (I	 don’t	 know	 of	 any	 chair	 more
comfortable	than	this),	and	kept	it,	and	still	keeps	it,	a	secret	from	the
family.
At	about	 this	 time	 I	 returned	 from	Munich	with	renewed	courage,
went	 to	 a	 renting	 agent,	 and	 almost	 the	 first	 thing	 they	 offered	me
was	an	apartment	in	one	of	the	most	beautiful	palaces.3	Two	rooms,	a
hall,	half	of	which	had	been	converted	into	a	bathroom.	Six	hundred
kronen	a	year.	It	was	like	the	fulfillment	of	a	dream.	I	went	to	see	it.
The	 rooms	 high	 and	 beautiful,	 red	 and	 gold,	 rather	 like	 Versailles.
Four	 windows	 overlooking	 a	 quiet,	 dreamy	 courtyard,	 one	 window
into	the	garden.	The	garden!	On	entering	the	gateway	to	the	palace,
one	can	hardly	believe	one’s	eyes.	Through	the	tall	arch	of	the	second
gate,	 flanked	by	 caryatids,	 one	 catches	 sight	 of	 a	 beautifully	 spaced
double	 flight	 of	 stone	 steps	 leading	 to	 the	 large	 garden	which	 rises
gradually	in	a	wide	sweep	up	to	a	belvedere.
But	the	apartment	had	one	minor	fault.	The	present	tenant,	a	young
man	 separated	 from	 his	 wife,	 had	 lived	 in	 the	 apartment	 with	 his
manservant	 for	 only	 a	 few	 months	 when	 he	 was	 unexpectedly
transferred	 (he	 is	 an	 official),	 and	 had	 to	 leave	 Prague.	 But	 he	 had
already	spent	so	much	on	the	apartment	that	he	was	reluctant	to	give
it	 up.	 So	 he	 kept	 it	 on,	 and	 was	 looking	 for	 someone	 willing	 to
compensate	 him	 for	 at	 least	 some	 of	 his	 expenses	 (installing
electricity,	 building	 the	bathroom,	putting	 in	 cupboards,	 installing	 a
telephone,	 a	 large	 fitted	 carpet).	 I	 was	 not	 that	 someone.	 He	 was
asking	 650	 kronen	 (surely	 little	 enough).	 Too	much	 for	me.	What’s



more,	the	exaggeratedly	high,	cold	rooms	were	too	sumptuous	for	me:
after	 all,	 I	 had	 no	 furniture,	 and	 there	 were	 other	 minor
considerations.	 In	 the	 same	 palace,	 however,	 direct	 from	 the
management,	 there	 was	 another	 apartment	 for	 rent—on	 the	 second
floor,	somewhat	lower	ceilings,	overlooking	the	street,	with	Hradčany
directly	 outside	 the	 windows.	 Friendlier,	 more	 human,
unpretentiously	furnished;	a	visiting	countess,	probably	more	modest
in	her	demands,	had	lived	here;	her	old	furniture	with	a	girlish	touch
about	 it	 still	 remained.	 Alas,	 there	 was	 some	 doubt	 about	 the
apartment	being	available,	which	at	the	time	made	me	feel	desperate.
And	in	this	frame	of	mind	I	went	to	Ottla’s	house	which	had	just	been
finished.	 It	 had	 all	 the	 defects	 of	 a	 house	 newly	 occupied,	 but	 I
haven’t	time	now	to	tell	you	how	we	coped	with	them.	Today	it	suits
me	perfectly.	In	every	respect:	the	pleasant	walk	up	to	the	house,	the
silence;	only	a	very	 thin	wall	 separates	me	 from	a	neighbor,	but	 the
neighbor	 is	 quiet	 enough;	 I	 take	 my	 evening	 meal	 up	 there,	 and
usually	 remain	 there	 until	midnight;	 and	 then	 the	 advantage	 of	 the
walk	home;	I	have	to	remind	myself	to	stop,	then	I	have	the	walk	to
cool	my	head.	As	for	life	there,	it	is	something	very	special	to	have	a
house	of	one’s	own,	to	keep	the	world	out	by	locking	the	door—not	of
a	room,	not	of	an	apartment,	but	of	a	house;	to	step	out	of	the	front
door	directly	into	the	snow	and	the	quiet	street.	The	whole	place	20
kronen	a	month,	my	 sister	 supplying	all	my	needs,	 the	 little	 flower-
girl	 (Ottla’s	 pupil)	 waiting	 on	 me	 as	 little	 as	 necessary,	 everything
working	very	well	and	all	very	pleasant.
And	now,	at	this	very	moment,	 it	 is	decided	that	the	apartment	in
the	 palace	 is	 available	 for	me,	 after	 all.	 The	manager,	 whom	 I	 had
done	a	 favor,	 is	well	disposed	 toward	me.	 I	 can	have	 the	apartment
overlooking	the	street	for	600,	but	without	the	furniture,	on	which	I
had	 counted.	 Two	 rooms	 and	 a	 hall.	 It	 has	 electric	 light	 but	 no
bathroom,	 no	 tub,	 but	 this	 I	 don’t	 really	 need.	 Now	 briefly,	 the
advantages	of	the	present	position	over	those	of	the	palace	apartment:
1.	 The	 advantage	 of	 everything	 remaining	 as	 it	 is.	 2.	 I	 am	 content
now,	why	create	potential	regrets.	3.	The	loss	of	a	house	of	one’s	own.
4.	The	 loss	of	 the	walk	home	at	night	which	helps	me	 to	 sleep.	5.	 I
should	 have	 to	 borrow	 some	 furuiture	 from	 my	 sister	 who	 is	 now
living	with	us;	for	one	of	the	rooms,	which	is	enormous,	I	should	have
literally	only	a	bed.	The	expense	of	moving.	6.	From	where	I	am	now
the	 office	 is	 ten	minutes	 nearer.	 I	 think	 the	 palace	 apartment	 faces
west,	 my	 present	 room	 gets	 the	 morning	 light.	 On	 the	 other	 hand,



advantages	 of	 the	 palace	 apartment:	 1.	 The	 advantage	 of	 change	 in
general,	 and	 this	 change	 in	 particular.	 2.	 The	 advantage	 of	 a	 quiet
apartment	 of	 one’s	 own.	 3.	 In	 my	 present	 working	 place	 I	 am	 not
independent;	 I	 am	actually	depriving	Ottla	of	 it;	however	 sweet	and
self-sacrificing	 she	may	be,	when	 she	 is	 in	 a	bad	 temper	 she	 cannot
help	letting	me	feel	it	once	in	a	while.	At	the	same	time	I	am	sure	she
would	be	sorry	if	I	were	to	stop	coming	to	her	little	house;	in	fact,	so
long	as	she	can	be	there	now	and	again	at	lunchtime,	and	on	Sundays
till	6,	 she	 is	 satisfied.	4.	Although	 I	won’t	have	my	walk	home,	and
going	 out	 at	 night	 will	 be	 difficult	 because	 the	 gate	 cannot	 be
unlocked	 from	 the	outside,	 I	 can	go	 instead	 for	 a	nice	 little	walk	 at
night	 in	 that	 section	 of	 the	 park	 that	 is	 reserved	 for	 the	 family.	 5.
When	the	war	 is	over	 I	want	 to	 try	 to	get	a	year’s	 leave	of	absence;
this	may	not	be	possible	at	once,	if	at	all.	Well,	this	would	mean	that
the	 two	of	us	would	have	 the	most	perfect	apartment	 imaginable	 in
Prague,	all	ready	for	you,	though	only	for	a	comparatively	short	time,
during	which	you	would	have	 to	do	without	a	kitchen	of	your	own,
and	even	without	a	bathroom.	Nevertheless,	it	would	be	very	much	to
my	 liking	 and	 you	 could	 have	 a	 thorough	 rest	 for	 two	 or	 three
months.	 And	 that	 indescribable	 park	 in	 the	 spring	 perhaps,	 the
summer	(the	family	will	be	away),	or	the	autumn.	But	unless	I	agree
to	 take	 the	 apartment	 at	 once—whether	 by	 moving	 in	 or	 simply
paying	the	rent	(150	kronen	a	quarter,	crazy	extravagance,	far	above
an	official’s	station)—I	am	not	likely	to	get	it.	In	fact,	I	have	virtually
taken	it	already,	but	no	doubt	 the	manager	would	gladly	release	me
from	the	agreement,	since	quite	naturally	the	proposition	is	in	no	way
as	important	to	him	as	it	is	to	me.	How	little	I	have	said.	But	now	you
give	your	judgment,	and	soon.

[Prague,	September	9,	1917]
Dearest,	 no	 evasions	 and	 gradual	 revelations,	 least	 of	 all	 with	 you.
The	only	evasion	is	my	not	writing	until	 today.	I	did	not	keep	silent
on	account	of	your	silence.	Your	silence	was	not	surprising,	what	does
surprise	 me	 is	 your	 kind	 reply.	 My	 last	 2	 letters,4	 though
characteristic,	 were	 nevertheless	 monstrous;	 there	 was	 no	 way	 of
answering	 them,	 directly	 or	 evasively,	 and	 this	 I	 knew:	 I	 am	 asleep
while	writing;	 I	wake	up	 quick	 enough	 afterwards,	 but	 then	 it’s	 too
late.	This,	by	the	way,	is	not	my	worst	attribute.	Here	is	the	reason	for
my	silence:	2	days	after	my	last	letter,	precisely	4	weeks	ago,	at	about



5	A.M.,	I	had	a	hemorrhage	of	the	lung.	Fairly	severe;	for	10	minutes	or
more	it	gushed	out	of	my	throat;	 I	 thought	 it	would	never	stop.	The
next	day	I	went	to	see	a	doctor,	who	on	this	and	several	subsequent
occasions	examined	and	X-rayed	me;	and	then,	at	Max’s	 insistence,	 I
went	to	see	a	specialist.	Without	going	into	all	the	medical	details,	the
outcome	 is	 that	 I	 have	 tuberculosis	 in	 both	 lungs.	 That	 I	 should
suddenly	develop	some	disease	did	not	surprise	me;	nor	did	the	sight
of	blood;	for	years	my	insomnia	and	headaches	have	invited	a	serious
illness,	 and	 ultimately	 my	maltreated	 blood	 had	 to	 burst	 forth;	 but
that	 it	 should	 be	 of	 all	 things	 tuberculosis,	 that	 at	 the	 age	 of	 34	 I
should	 be	 struck	 down	 overnight,	 with	 not	 a	 single	 predecessor
anywhere	in	the	family—this	does	surprise	me.	Well,	I	have	to	accept
it;	actually,	my	headaches	seem	to	have	been	washed	away	with	the
flow	 of	 blood.	 Its	 course	 at	 present	 cannot	 be	 foreseen;	 its	 future
development	remains	its	secret;	my	age	may	possibly	help	to	retard	it.
Next	week	I	am	going	to	the	country	for	at	least	3	months,	to	Ottla	in
Zürau	(Post	Office	Flöhau);	 I	wanted	to	retire,	but	 for	my	own	good
they	think	it	would	be	best	not	to	 let	me;	the	somewhat	sentimental
farewell	scenes	which,	from	force	of	habit,	I	am	unable	to	deny	myself
even	 now,	 do	 rather	 counteract	 my	 request,	 so	 I	 remain	 a	 regular
employee,	and	am	granted	leave	of	absence.	Although	of	course	I	am
not	treating	the	whole	affair	as	a	secret,	I	am	withholding	it	from	my
parents.	 This	 never	 occurred	 to	me	 at	 first.	 But	when,	 simply	 as	 an
experiment,	I	told	my	mother	casually	that	I	was	feeling	nervous	and
was	going	 to	ask	 for	a	 long	 leave,	and	she	 took	 it	all	as	a	matter	of
course	and	was	not	in	the	least	suspicious	(for	her	part	she	is	always
perfectly	 ready	at	 the	 slightest	 suggestion	 to	give	me	a	 leave	 for	 all
eternity),	I	simply	left	it	at	that,	and	this	is	how	it	stands	for	the	time
being	with	regard	to	my	father	as	well.
So	this	is	what	I	have	been	keeping	secret	for	4	weeks,	or	actually
for	only	one	week	 (the	precise	diagnosis	being	not	much	older	 than
that).	“Poor	dear	Felice”—were	the	last	words	I	wrote;	is	this	to	be	the
closing	phrase	to	all	my	letters?	It’s	not	a	knife	that	stabs	only	forward
but	one	that	wheels	around	and	stabs	back	as	well.

Franz

In	conclusion,	and	so	as	not	to	give	you	the	idea	that	I	am	feeling
especially	 ill	 at	 this	moment:	 I	 am	not;	 on	 the	 contrary.	True,	 I
have	been	coughing	since	that	night,	but	not	badly;	sometimes	I



run	a	slight	temperature,	sometimes	at	night	I	sweat	a	little,	am
rather	short	of	breath,	but	otherwise	I	am	positively	better	than	I
have	been	these	last	few	years.	The	headaches	have	left	me,	and
since	5	o’clock	 that	morning	 I	have	been	 sleeping	almost	better
than	before.	And	until	 then,	after	all,	what	 I	suffered	from	most
were	headaches	and	insomnia.

[Zürau,	September	30	or	October	1,	1917]
Dearest	 Felice,	 a	 letter	 from	 you	 arrived	 the	 day	 before	 yesterday.
What!	A	letter	so	soon?5	I	asked	myself,	and	did	not	read	it	for	a	long
time.	But	then	it	turned	out	to	be	a	letter	of	September	11th,	in	which
you	wrote	vaguely	of	 the	possibility	of	your	 trip,	and	which	 took	so
long	to	reach	me	because	you	had	addressed	it	to	Flöhau	in	Moravia
instead	 of	 Bohemia.	 And	 this	 is	 the	 explanation	 for	 my	 apparent
failure	to	reply	at	the	time.
But	today,	Sunday,	your	letters	of	Sept.	24th	and	26th	arrived.	They
came	early.	I	did	not	open	them	(there	was	also	a	letter	from	someone
else;	this	too	remained	unopened).	Then	my	mother	was	here	for	the
day	(she	told	me	she	had	asked	you	if	my	spirits	had	improved,	and
you	 said	 you	 hadn’t	 noticed).	 In	 the	 evening	 I	 still	 didn’t	 feel	 like
reading	the	letters;	first,	as	a	breathing	spell—a	breathing	spell	for	me
—I	wanted	to	write	to	you	irrespective	of	what	I	should	find	in	your
letters.	In	the	end,	of	course,	I	did	read	the	letters.
In	them	I	found	what	I	was	bound	to	find,	and	I	am	put	to	shame	to
an	extent	which	you	could	grasp	only	if	you	were	not	compelled	to	do
what	you	do	and	be	what	you	are.
The	way	you	saw	me	this	time	is	how	I	have	seen	myself	for	ages,
only	more	clearly,	which	is	why	I	can	explain	what	you	saw:
As	you	know,	 there	are	 two	combatants	at	war	within	me.	During
the	past	few	days	I	have	had	fewer	doubts	than	ever	that	the	better	of
the	 two	belongs	 to	 you.	By	word	and	 silence,	 and	a	 combination	of
both,	you	have	been	kept	informed	about	the	progress	of	the	war	for	5
years,	and	most	of	that	time	it	has	caused	you	suffering.	Were	you	to
ask	if	I	have	always	been	truthful,	I	could	only	say	that	with	no	one
else	have	 I	 suppressed	deliberate	 lies	as	 strenuously,	or—to	be	more
precise—more	 strenuously	 than	 I	 have	 with	 you.	 Subterfuges	 there
have	been,	lies	very	few,	assuming	that	it’s	possible	to	tell	“very	few”
lies.	I	am	a	mendacious	creature;	for	me	it	is	the	only	way	to	maintain
an	even	keel,	my	boat	is	fragile.	When	I	examine	my	ultimate	aim	it
shows	that	I	do	not	actually	strive	to	be	good,	to	answer	to	a	supreme



tribunal.	Very	much	the	opposite.	 I	 strive	 to	know	the	entire	human
and	 animal	 community,	 to	 recognize	 their	 fundamental	 preferences,
desires,	 and	 moral	 ideals,	 to	 reduce	 them	 to	 simple	 rules,	 and	 as
quickly	 as	 possible	 to	 adopt	 these	 rules	 so	 as	 to	 be	 pleasing	 to
everyone,	 indeed	 (here	 comes	 the	 inconsistency)	 to	 become	 so
pleasing	that	in	the	end	I	might	openly	act	out	my	inherent	baseness
before	 the	 eyes	 of	 the	 world	 without	 forfeiting	 its	 love—the	 only
sinner	 not	 to	 be	 roasted.	 In	 short,	 my	 only	 concern	 is	 the	 human
tribunal,	 and	 I	 would	 like	 to	 deceive	 even	 this,	 and	 what’s	 more
without	actual	deception.6
Apply	this	to	our	own	case,	which	is	not	just	an	arbitrary	one,	but
altogether	the	one	most	truly	representative	of	me.	You	are	my	human
tribunal.	Of	the	two	who	are	at	war	within	me,	or	rather	whose	war	I
consist	of—excepting	one	small	tormented	remnant—the	one	is	good,
the	other	evil.	From	time	to	time	they	reverse	their	roles,	which	adds
to	the	confusion	of	their	war,	already	so	confused.	Until	very	recently,
however,	despite	reverses,	it	was	possible	for	me	to	imagine	that	the
most	improbable	would	happen	(the	most	probable	would	be	eternal
war),	which	always	seemed	like	the	radiant	goal,	and	I,	grown	pitiful
and	wretched	over	the	years,	would	at	last	be	allowed	to	have	you.
Suddenly	it	appears	that	the	loss	of	blood	was	too	great.	The	blood
shed	by	the	good	one	(the	one	that	now	seems	good	to	us)	in	order	to
win	you,	 serves	 the	 evil	 one.	Where	 the	 evil	 one	on	his	 own	would
probably	 or	 possibly	 not	 have	 found	 a	 decisive	 new	weapon	 for	 his
defense,	the	good	one	offers	him	just	that.	For	secretly	I	don’t	believe
this	 illness	to	be	tuberculosis,	at	 least	not	primarily	tuberculosis,	but
rather	a	sign	of	my	general	bankruptcy.	I	had	thought	the	war	could
last	longer,	but	it	can’t.	The	blood	issues	not	from	the	lung,	but	from	a
decisive	stab	delivered	by	one	of	the	combatants.
From	my	 tuberculosis	 this	 one	 now	 derives	 the	 kind	 of	 immense
support	 a	 child	 gets	 from	 clinging	 to	 its	mother’s	 skirts.	What	more
can	 the	 other	 one	 hope	 for?	 Has	 not	 the	war	 been	most	 splendidly
concluded?	 It	 is	 tuberculosis,	 and	 that	 is	 the	 end.	Weak	 and	weary,
almost	invisible	to	you	when	in	this	state,	what	can	the	other	one	do
but	lean	on	your	shoulder	here	in	Zürau,	and	with	you,	the	purest	of
the	pure,	 stare	 in	amazement,	bewildered	and	hopeless,	 at	 the	great
man	who—now	that	he	 feels	 sure	of	universal	 love,	or	of	 that	of	 its
female	representative	assigned	to	him—begins	to	display	his	atrocious
baseness.	It	is	a	distortion	of	my	striving,	which	in	itself	is	already	a
distortion.



Please	don’t	ask	why	I	put	up	a	barrier.	Don’t	humiliate	me	in	this
way.	One	word	like	this	from	you	and	I	would	be	at	your	feet	again.
But	 at	 once	 my	 actual,	 or	 rather,	 long	 before	 that,	 my	 alleged
tuberculosis	would	stab	me	in	the	face,	and	I	would	have	to	give	up.	It
is	 a	 weapon	 compared	 to	 which	 the	 countless	 others	 used	 earlier,
ranging	from	“physical	incapacity”	up	to	my	“work”	and	down	to	my
“parsimony,”	look	expedient	and	primitive.
And	 now	 I	 am	 going	 to	 tell	 you	 a	 secret	 which	 at	 the	moment	 I

don’t	 even	 believe	 myself	 (although	 the	 distant	 darkness	 that	 falls
about	me	at	each	attempt	to	work,	or	think,	might	possibly	convince
me),	but	which	is	bound	to	be	true:	I	will	never	be	well	again.	Simply
because	 it	 is	 not	 the	 kind	 of	 tuberculosis	 that	 can	 be	 laid	 in	 a
deckchair	and	nursed	back	to	health,	but	a	weapon	that	continues	to
be	 of	 supreme	necessity	 as	 long	 as	 I	 remain	 alive.	And	 both	 cannot
remain	alive.

Franz

[POSTMARK:	Zürau,	Post	Office	Flöhau,	October	16,	1917]

Dearest	Felice,	 I	am	copying	out	 for	you	the	beginning	of	Max’s	 last
letter,	 because	 it	 is	 indicative	 of	my,	 or	 our,	 situation:	 “If	 I	weren’t
afraid	that	it	would	worry	you,	I	would	tell	you	that	your	letters	give
the	impression	of	great	calm.	There	now,	I	have	told	you—which	goes
to	prove	that	I	am	not	even	seriously	afraid	that	this,	or	anything	else,
could	worry	you.	You	are	happy	in	your	unhappiness.”
Before	I	tell	you	how	I	answered	him:	Isn’t	this	what	you	would	say,

too?	Not	quite	so	crudely,	but	by	implication?	If	it	is,	then	I	will	give
you	one	of	an	endless	succession	of	examples:	That	evening	in	Zürau,
shortly	before	your	departure,	you	stepped	out	of	the	house.	I	sat	on
in	my	room	for	a	long	time,	then	went	out	to	the	garden	to	look	for
you,	returned,	heard	from	Ottla	that	you	were	in	front	of	the	house—
and	joined	you.	When	I	said:	“So	you	are	here?	I	was	looking	for	you
everywhere,”	 you	 answered:	 “But	 I	 heard	 your	 voice	 indoors	 only	 a
moment	ago.”	Except	for	a	few	insignificant	words	we	hardly	spoke	to
each	 other	 again,	 although	 we	 continued	 to	 stand	 on	 the	 steps	 for
quite	a	while,	gazing	out	over	the	Ringplatz.	You	were	unhappy	about
the	 pointlessness	 of	 your	 journey,	 about	 my	 incomprehensible
behavior,	about	everything.	I	was	not	unhappy.	“Happy,”	on	the	other



hand,	would	have	been	a	very	false	description	of	my	condition.	I	was
tormented,	but	not	unhappy;	I	did	not	feel	the	whole	tragedy	as	much
as	 I	 saw	 it,	 recognized	 it,	 and	 diagnosed	 it	 in	 its	 immensity	 which
surpasses	all	my	strength	(my	strength	as	a	living	man	at	least);	and	in
this	 knowledge	 I	 remained	 relatively	 calm,	my	 lips	 shut	 tight,	 very
tight.	That	in	doing	so	I	probably	put	on	a	bit	of	an	act	is	something
for	which	 I	 can	 readily	 forgive	myself,	 because	 the	 spectacle	 before
me	 (admittedly	 not	 for	 the	 first	 time)	 was	 so	 hellish	 that	 one	 was
bound	 to	 try	 to	 help	 the	 audience	 by	 introducing	 some	 diverting
music;	it	did	not	succeed,	as	it	hardly	ever	does,	but	it	did	take	place.
What	I	wrote	to	Max	was	much	the	same,	I	mean	of	course	in	the
same	 vein.7	 Actually	 his	 observation	 about	 finding	 happiness	 in
unhappiness	is	beyond	me,	and	is	a	kind	of	contemporary	criticism.	I
don’t	know	if	he	has	put	it	into	an	article	yet,	but	it	has	been	on	his
mind	 for	 a	 long	 time.	 Whatever	 he	 makes	 of	 it—an	 observation,	 a
thing	 to	 be	 deplored,	 at	 worst	 even	 a	 warning—he	 may	 indeed	 be
right;	 but	 what	 he	 must	 not	 do,	 as	 is	 his	 wont,	 is	 make	 it	 an
accusation,	 a	 reproach.	 “Finding	 happiness	 in	 unhappiness,”	 which
means	 simultaneously	 “finding	 unhappiness	 in	 happiness”	 (although
the	 former	may	be	 the	more	decisive)—these	words	may	have	been
said	 when	 Cain	 was	 branded.	 It	 means	 being	 out	 of	 step	 with	 the
world;	 it	 means	 that	 he	 who	 bears	 the	 mark	 is	 the	 one	 who	 has
destroyed	 the	 world	 and,	 incapable	 of	 resurrecting	 it,	 is	 hunted
through	the	ruins.	Unhappiness,	however,	 is	not	what	he	feels,	since
unhappiness	belongs	 to	 life	 and	 this	he	has	disposed	of,	 but	he	 sees
the	 fact	 with	 inordinate	 clarity,	 and	 in	 this	 sphere	 that	 amounts	 to
unhappiness.

As	for	my	physical	condition,	it	is	excellent;	I	hardly	dare	inquire	after
yours.
Next	 Saturday	 Max	 is	 giving	 a	 Zionist	 lecture	 in	 Komotau,	 quite
near	here;	I	am	joining	them	on	the	train;	on	Sunday	afternoon	we	go
to	 Zürau,	 and	 that	 evening	 we	 all	 travel	 back	 to	 Prague—I	 to	 the
specialist,	 the	dentist,	 and	 the	 office.	All	 three	 visits	will	 be	 a	 great
ordeal	for	me,	the	journey	itself	the	greatest	of	all.	I	hope	to	be	back
in	2	or	3	days.
Max’s	 visit	 here	 is	 due	 solely	 to	 the	 chance	 of	 his	 lecture	 at
Komotau,	for	earlier	on,	and	giving	them	specific	reasons,	I	had	asked
Max,	Felix,	and	Baum	not	to	come	and	see	me.
I	don’t	know	Kant,	but	the	sentence	is	surely	applicable	to	nations



only;	it	would	hardly	apply	to	civil	wars,	to	“inner	wars,”	where	peace
would	be	of	a	kind	desirable	only	for	one’s	ashes.

Franz

The	following	two	fragments	were	found	in	Max	Brod’s	archives,	and
were	 either	 drafts	 for	 letters	 or	 else	 parts	 of	 letters	 that	 were	 never
sent.	The	 first,	 to	Grete	Bloch,	may	have	been	written	shortly	before
Kafka’s	unmailed	letter	to	her	of	December	15/16,	1913,	or	may	be	a
continuation	 of	 that	 letter.	 The	 second	 bears	 a	 note	 in	Max	 Brod’s
writing:	“Draft	of	a	letter,	probably	to	F.”

To	Grete	Bloch
[LETTERHEAD:	Chamber	of	Deputies]
(Now	this	old	paper	from	last	summer’s	Congress	is	all	I	have.)	But
these	words	may	be	too	big.	By	not	answering	 letters	one	can	easily
become	estranged	from	the	other,	through	one’s	own	fault.	Yet	you	sat
opposite	me,	were	far	more	human	than	I	was,	understood	far	better
and	 far	more	 than	 I,	who	 just	 sat	 there	 like	a	 figure	of	 clay;	on	 the
other	hand	one	has	to	admit	that	there	can	be	no	clay	on	earth	other
than	this	celestial	one.	(And	in	a	sense	you	must	be	aware	of	this,	or
you	wouldn’t	have	put	up	with	me	in	this	way.)	That’s	why	I	think	I
put	my	questions	 too	 severely	 in	 the	 foregoing.	Whatever	 you’ll	 tell
me	 will	 no	 doubt	 at	 this	 moment	 be	 right,	 and	 even	 unasked,	 no
doubt	 you’ll	 reply	 as	 soon	 as	 you	 can;	 though	 I	 can	 hardly	 refrain
from	asking	you	to	do	so.
Will	you	be	going	to	Berlin	for	Christmas?	If	so,	you	will	be	passing
through	Prague	and	one	can	see	and	talk	to	you	at	the	station.	Do	let
me	know	 the	day	 and	 the	 time.	Don’t	 be	 afraid	 that	 I	 shall	 squeeze
into	the	compartment	to	join	you.	I	shall	stay	here	quietly	and,	as	in
the	 past	 and	 in	 the	 future,	 I	 shall	 continue	 to	 spend	 Christmas
sleeping,	daydreaming,	and	idling.
Incidentally,	 you	do	 lead	 a	 strange	 life	 in	Vienna.	 I,	 for	whatever
infamous	 reasons,	 don’t	 often	 say	 positive	 things	 about	 myself,	 but
one	 thing	 I	can	say:	 I	 can	understand	 things	 such	as	your	 life	 there,
can	understand	them	up	to	the	hilt,	to	the	point	where	it	becomes	really
hot.
And	by	the	way,	to	conclude	with	an	outrageously	tactless	question:
if	 you	 earn	 so	 much	 money,	 why	 is	 your	 room	 small	 and	 dark?



Perhaps	you	don’t	feel	the	need	for	a	large,	light	room.	And	yet	your
comments	on	it	sound	almost	regretful.

With	kindest	regards,	yours,	Franz	K.
One	more	thing	I	want	to	say:	there	were	and	are	moments	when—
in	reality	or	from	my	recollection,	usually	from	my	recollection—your
way	 of	 looking	 at	 me—something	more	 than	 what	 you	 are	 and,	 in
essence,	 something	 higher	 seems	 to	 break	 through;	 but,	 as	 in	 other
respects,	 I	am	too	 feeble	 to	hold	on	to	 it,	or	 to	hold	on	to	myself	 in
face	of	it.

*	[ADDED	BETWEEN	THE	LINES]	Why	do	you	ask	in	this	way?
†	[ADDED	BETWEEN	THE	LINES]	to	whom	I	have	divulged	nothing
‡	 [BETWEEN	 THE	 LINES]	 Anyway	 I	 believe	 I	 wrote	 you	 2	 letters	 recently,	 though	 very
insignificant	ones.



Notes

Based	 on	 the	 notes	 prepared	 for	 the	 German-language	 edition	 by
Jürgen	Born

The	following	works	are	abbreviated	in	the	Notes;	all	references
are	to	the	Schocken	editions:

Works	by	Franz	Kafka
Amerika,	A	Novel.	New	York,	1962.
Briefe:	1902–1924.	New	York,	1958.
Dearest	Father:	Stories	and	Other	Writings.	New	York,	1954.
Diaries.	 Vol.	 I:	 1910–1913;	 Vol.	 II:	 1914–1923.	 New	 York,
1948.
The	 Great	 Wall	 of	 China:	 Stories	 and	 Reflections.	 New	 York,
1946,	1970.
The	Penal	Colony:	Stories	and	Short	Pieces.	New	York,	1948.

Max	Brod,	Franz	Kafka:	A	Biography.	New	York,	1960.

1912
				1	Max	Brod’s	father,	Adolf	Brod,	was	president	of	the	Union	Bank
in	Prague.	At	the	time,	he,	his	wife,	and	their	sons,	Max	and	Otto,
lived	 at	 Schalengasse	 (Skořepka)	 1;	 their	 daughter	 Sophie	 was
married	 to	Max	 Friedmann,	 a	 businessman;	 he	was	 a	 cousin	 of
Felice	Bauer.

	 	 	 	2	Most	 likely	the	trip	to	Weimar	which	Kafka	and	Max	Brod	had
made	 in	 the	 summer	 of	 1912.	 Since	 it	 was	 largely	 devoted	 to
visiting	cultural	sites	(houses	of	Goethe,	Schiller,	Liszt,	museums,
libraries,	etc.),	it	may	have	been	called	the	“Thalia	trip”	after	the



muse	of	comedy.
				3	The	feast	day	of	St.	Wenceslas,	patron	saint	of	Bohemia.
	 	 	 	 4	 Possibly	 a	 planned	 performance	 of	 the	 operetta	Circe	 und	 ihre
Schweine	[Circe	and	Her	Swine],	published	in	Pierrot	der	Spassvogel
[Pierrot	 the	 Wag],	 an	 anthology	 from	 the	 writings	 of	 Jules
Laforgue,	edited	by	Franz	Blei	and	Max	Brod	(Berlin,	1909).	The
performance	never	took	place.

				5	Arkadia:	A	Yearbook	for	Poetry,	edited	by	Max	Brod	and	published
in	June	1913	by	Kurt	Wolff,	Leipzig.	Kafka’s	contribution	was	the
story	“The	Judgment.”

	 	 	 	 6	 Kafka’s	 first	 book,	 Betrachtung	 [Meditation],	 was	 published	 by
Ernst	Rowohlt,	Leipzig,	in	mid-December	1912.

				7	Kafka	refers	to	his	letter	of	September	28	which	consisted	of	four
pages	measuring	13⅛″	×	8⅛″.

				8	Max	Brod’s	sister.
				9	Later	Kafka	enclosed	the	first	with	his	letter	of	December	20–21,
1912;	the	second	with	his	letter	of	May	18,	1913.

		10	See	Diaries	(February	11,	1913),	I,	pp.	278	f.,	and	Kafka’s	letter	to
Felice	of	June	2,	1913.

		11	At	the	time	Kafka	sent	most	of	his	letters	by	registered	mail.
		12	In	the	First	Balkan	War	(October	18,	1912,	to	May	30,	1913)	an
alliance	 of	 Bulgaria,	 Serbia,	 Greece,	 and	 Montenegro	 had
defeated	Turkey.	The	concomitant	strengthening	of	Serbia	posed
a	threat	to	the	Austrian	monarchy.

		13	The	manuscript	of	Meditation.
		14	See	Diaries	(August	20,	1912),	I,	p.	268:	“When	I	arrived	at	Brod’s
on	August	13th,	she	was	sitting	at	the	table	and	yet	she	looked	to
me	like	a	domestic.	 I	was	not	at	all	curious	about	who	she	was,
but	rather	took	her	for	granted	at	once.”

	 	 15	 An	 operetta	 Das	 Autoliebchen	 [The	 Auto	 Sweetheart],	 by	 Jean
Gilbert	 (pseudonym	of	Max	Winterfeld,	 1879–1942),	which	was
first	performed	by	 the	Berlin	Residenz	Ensemble	 in	1912.	Kafka
writes	“Autogirl.”

		16	Felice’s	brother,	Ferdinand,	called	“Ferry.”
		17	Felice’s	sister	Else	was	married	in	Budapest.
	 	18	A	Viennese	monthly	promoting	Jewish	settlements	 in	Palestine,



edited	by	Adolf	Böhm.
	 	19	Max	Brod’s	novel	Arnold	Beer,	 das	Schicksal	 eines	 Juden	 [Arnold
Beer,	the	Fate	of	a	Jew],	Berlin,	1912.

	 	 20	 The	 review	 by	 Mathias	 Acher	 (Nathan	 Birnbaum,	 1846–1937,
political	and	religious	writer)	had	appeared	in	Ost	und	West,	XII,
No.	8	(August	1912),	cols.	775–76.

		21	Max	Brod’s	novel	Schloss	Nornepygge:	Der	Roman	des	Indifferenten
[Nornepygge	Castle:	A	Novel	of	an	Indifferent	Man],	Berlin,	1908.

	 	 22	 The	 quoted	 line,	 slightly	 altered,	 comes	 from	 Der	 Talisman
(1893),	a	fantasy	play	by	Ludwig	Fulda	(1862–1939).

		23	The	“Representation	House”	in	Prague	at	the	northeastern	end	of
the	Graben	(Na	Přikopě),	with	restaurant,	coffeeshop,	dance	halls,
and	assembly	rooms.

		24	All	Saints’	Day.
		25	See	Diaries	(January	3,	1912),	I,	p.	211.
	 	 26	Compare	 the	 penultimate	 paragraph	 in	 the	 chapter	 “The	Hotel
Occidental”	in	Kafka’s	novel	Amerika,	pp.	159	f.

	 	 27	 Kafka’s	 sisters	 were	 Elli	 (Gabriele),	 Valli	 (Valerie),	 and	 Ottla
(Ottilie).	Elli	was	born	on	September	22,	1889,	and	married	Karl
Hermann;	Valli,	 born	September	25,	1890,	married	Josef	Pollak
on	January	12,	1913;	Kafka’s	favorite	sister,	Ottla,	born	October
29,	1892,	did	not	marry	until	1920.

	 	28	The	asbestos	 factory	was	owned	by	Kafka’s	brother-in-law,	Karl
Hermann.

		29	In	August	1909,	Felice	Bauer	took	a	job	as	a	shorthand-typist	at
Carl	 Lindström	 A.G.,	 Berlin.	 In	 1912	 she	 was	 promoted	 to	 a
leading	position	in	the	firm’s	Parlograph	division.

		30	Felix,	the	son	of	Karl	and	Elli	Hermann.
	 	 31	 The	 story	 “Aus	 einer	 Nähschule”	was	 published	 in	Max	 Brod’s
Weiberwirtschaft:	 Drei	 Erzählungen	 [Petticoat	 Government:	 Three
Stories],	Berlin,	1913.

		32	Of	Kafka’s	Meditation.
		33	Gabriel	Schillings	Flucht	[Gabriel	Schilling’s	Flight],	1912,	drama	by
Gerhart	Hauptmann	(1862–1946).

		34	Kafka	had	met	the	Yiddish	actor	Yitzhak	Löwy,	a	native	of	Russia,
in	October	1911,	when	he	and	his	company	performed	in	Prague.



Kafka	 became	 Löwy’s	 friend	 and	 followed	 the	 activities	 of	 his
company	with	great	interest.

	 	 35	 The	 Yiddish	 evening	 took	 place	 in	 the	 banquet	 room	 of	 the
Jewish	Town	Hall	 in	Prague	on	February	18,	 1912.	The	 text	 of
Kafka’s	 introductory	 speech	may	be	 found	 in	Dearest	Father,	 pp.
381	ff.	See	also	Diaries	(February	13	and	25,	1912),	I,	pp.	232	ff.

		36	Kafka’s	father,	the	son	of	a	butcher,	did	not	appreciate	his	son’s
vegetarian	habits.

		37	Rudolf	G.	Binding	(1867–1938),	German	author.
		38	Marie	Werner,	who	came	to	the	Kafka	family	as	governess	to	the
children	and	then	stayed	on;	she	spoke	only	Czech.

		39	Gerti,	a	daughter	of	Kafka’s	sister	Elli	Hermann.	Her	recollections
of	Kafka	are	contained	in	a	letter	to	Max	Brod	of	August	27,	1947
(Max	Brod,	Der	Prager	Kreis	[Stuttgart,	1966],	pp.	116	ff.).

		40	One	of	the	short	prose	pieces	in	Meditation.
	 	 41	 At	 Kafka’s	 express	 request,	 Meditation	 was	 composed	 in	 an
unusually	large	type.

	 	42	This	 unmailed	 letter	was	 found	 among	Kafka’s	 papers	 after	 his
death.	It	was	first	published	in	Brod,	Biography,	p.	140.

	 	43	 “Der	Verschollene”	 [“The	Man	Who	Disappeared”]	was	Kafka’s
title	 for	 the	 (unfinished)	 novel	 that	 Max	 Brod	 edited	 in	 1927
under	 the	 title	 Amerika.	 Throughout	 the	 correspondence	 with
Felice,	Kafka	means	this	work	when	he	refers	to	“my	novel.”

	 	 44	 The	 sketch	 “Grosser	 Lärm”	 [“Great	 Noise”],	 published	 in	 the
Prague	 literary	 periodical	 Herder-Blätter,	 I,	 No.	 4–5	 (October
1912),	44.	The	sketch	was	written	in	November	1911;	a	first	draft
appears	in	Diaries	(November	5	or	6,	1911),	I,	p.	133.

		45	Here	Kafka	breaks	from	the	formal	Sie	into	the	more	intimate	Du.
—Trans.

		46	The	draft	of	a	letter	to	Felice	of	November	9,	1912.	See	note	42,
1912.

		47	Presumably	it	was	this	letter	that	prompted	Felice	to	write	Max
Brod	and	ask	 for	 an	 explanation	of	Kafka’s	 behavior;	 see	Brod’s
answer	of	November	15,	1912.	A	few	days	earlier,	when	he	was
in	 Berlin,	 Brod	 had	 telephoned	 Felice	 in	 order	 to	 mediate
between	 her	 and	 Kafka.	 In	 his	 letter	 to	 Brod	 of	 November	 13,



1912,	 Kafka	 remarks:	 “There	 [in	 Berlin]	 you	 surely	 said
everything	 one	 could	 possibly	 say	 out	 of	 goodness,
understanding,	 and	 sensitivity,	 but	 even	 if	 an	 angel	 had	 taken
your	place	and	spoken	into	the	telephone	he	would	not	have	been
able	to	prevail	against	my	venomous	letter”	(Briefe,	p.	111).

		48	Part	in	a	skit	performed	at	the	anniversary	celebration	of	Felice’s
firm.

		49	German	“die	Fülle	der	Gesichte,”	from	Goethe,	Faust,	I,	verse	519.
		50	In	this	letter	the	formal	Sie	is	used.
	 	51	The	Palais	Waldstein	with	 its	walled	gardens	 is	 situated	not	 far
from	 the	 former	 Royal	 Imperial	 Government	 Office	 in	 Prague’s
Small	Side;	it	was	built	in	1623–30.

	 	 52	 Kafka’s	 office	 hours	 ran	 from	 8	 A.M.	 to	 2	 P.M.	 without	 a	 lunch
break.

		53	First	indication	of	the	genesis	of	The	Metamorphosis.	In	the	letters
up	to	December	6,	1912,	“story”	always	refers	to	this	work.

		54	The	Prague	branch	of	Assicurazioni	Generali,	a	private	insurance
company	 in	 Trieste,	 where	 Kafka	 was	 employed	 from	 October
1907	to	July	1908.

	 	 55	 Dr.	 Robert	 Marschner,	 one	 of	 the	 directors	 of	 the	 Workers’
Accident	Insurance	Institute.

		56	In	July	1912,	after	the	visit	to	Weimar,	Kafka	spent	three	weeks
at	the	Sanatorium	Rudolf	Just	in	Jungborn	(Harz	Mountains).

	 	 57	 Kafka	 had	met	 this	 gentleman,	 Herr	 H.,	 a	 land	 surveyor	 from
Silesia,	during	his	stay	in	Jungborn	in	July	1912;	see	Diaries	(July
14,	1912),	II,	pp.	306	f.

		58	The	Buss-	und	Bettag	[Day	of	Penitence	and	Prayer],	a	Protestant
holiday.

	 	59	The	 first	 is	 the	 letter	 of	November	16,	 1912;	 the	 second	 is	 the
second	letter	of	November	11,	1912.

		60	3:00	P.M.,	as	Kafka,	clarifying	a	misunderstanding	on	Felice’s	part,
states	in	his	letter	of	November	24,	1912.

		61	See	Max	Brod’s	letter	to	Felice	Bauer	of	November	22,	1912.
		62	Josef	Pollak,	the	fiancé	of	Kafka’s	sister	Valli.
		63	Karl	Hermann’s	asbestos	factory.	The	“farewell”	letter	appears	in



Briefe,	pp.	107	ff.
		64	Yüan	Tzu-tsai,	also	known	as	Yüan	Mei,	considered	the	greatest
Chinese	poet	of	his	century.	Kafka	found	the	German	translation
and	the	commentary	in	Hans	Heilmann,	Chinesische	Lyrik	vom	12.
Jahrhundert	 v.	Chr.	 bis	 zur	Gegenwart	 (Munich,	 1905).	Max	Brod
states:	“Kafka	was	very	fond	of	the	book;	at	times	he	preferred	it
to	 all	 others	 and	 he	 often	 read	 from	 it	 to	 me	 with	 great
enthusiasm”	(Verzweiflung	und	Erlösung	im	Werk	Kafkas	[Frankfurt
am	Main,	1959],	p.	67).

	 	 65	 At	 the	 time	 Kafka	 lived	 in	 his	 parents’	 home	 at	 Niklasstrasse
(Mikulášská)	36,	a	corner	building	not	far	from	the	Moldau.

		66	Some	of	Felice’s	 lady	friends	at	the	office	had	composed	a	little
poem	for	her	birthday.

		67	The	Prager	Tagblatt	of	September	25,	1912,	carried	a	news	story,
“Beatification	 of	 the	 Ugandan	 Martyrs.”	 Kafka	 had	 cut	 out	 the
item	and	enclosed	it	with	his	 letter	(see	Appendix).	The	martyrs
were	canonized	in	October	1964.

		68	Die	Neue	Rundschau,	founded	in	1890,	was	the	foremost	German
literary	monthly.

		69	This	clipping	has	not	been	preserved.
		70	Oskar	Baum	(1883–1941),	writer	 in	Prague	to	whom	Kafka	had
been	 introduced	 by	 Max	 Brod	 in	 the	 autumn	 of	 1904.	 Baum
belonged	to	the	circle	of	friends	of	Max	Brod,	Felix	Weltsch,	and
Franz	Kafka.	 The	 young	writers	met	 almost	 every	weekend	 and
read	to	each	other	from	their	works.

		71	Max	Brod	confirms	that	Kafka	read	The	Metamorphosis	to	them	on
November	24,	 1912,	 but	 assumed	 it	was	 the	 entire	 story	 (Brod,
Biography,	p.	128).

		72	Cf.	Kafka’s	letter	of	December	3,	1912.
	 	 73	 The	 Yiddish	 Actors’	 Company	 of	 which	 Yitzhak	 Löwy	 was	 a
member.

	 	 74	 Kafka	 used	 a	 provincial	 term	 (Meistbot)	 for	 highest	 bid,	which
would	have	been	unfamiliar	to	a	Berliner.

		75	This	friend	was	Dr.	Friedrich	Schiller,	a	city	official	in	Breslau.	Cf.
Diaries	 (September	8	and	12,	1912),	 I,	pp.	271	f.,	and	(July	11–
20,	1912),	II,	pp.	304	ff.



		76	Max	Brod,	Die	Höhe	des	Gefühls	(Leipzig,	1912).
	 	 77	 Friedrich	 Feigl	 (1884–1966),	 painter	 and	 graphic	 artist	 whom
Kafka	mentions	repeatedly	in	succeeding	letters.	 In	1894	he	had
been	a	classmate	of	Kafka’s	in	the	Altstädter	German	Gymnasium.

	 	78	The	amateur	performance	at	 the	anniversary	celebration	of	 the
Carl	Lindström	concern.

		79	Invitation	of	the	Herder	Association	in	Prague.
	 	80	Herbert	Eulenberg	 (1876–1949),	German	author	and	dramatist,
gave	 a	 reading	 at	 the	 Prague	 literary	 society	 Concordia	 on
December	1.

		81	Valli	Kafka	was	married	on	January	12,	1913.
		82	See	Diaries	(August	20,	1912),	I,	p.	268.
		83	Probably	Max	Brod,	who	had	visited	Felice	in	Berlin	around	the
middle	of	November	1912;	cf.	Max	Brod’s	letters	of	November	15
and	22,	1912.

		84	In	October	1910,	with	Max	and	Otto	Brod.
		85	The	Institute’s	annual	report	for	the	calendar	year	1910	contained
a	report	by	Kafka	on	“Measures	for	the	Prevention	of	Accidents”
that	dealt	with	planing	machines,	 cylindrical	 cutters,	 and	cutter
heads.	An	extract	is	reprinted	in	Brod,	Biography,	pp.	83	f.

		86	The	board	elections	of	the	Workers’	Accident	Insurance	Institute;
see	letter	of	December	5,	1912.

		87	See	Kafka’s	letter	of	November	30,	1912.
	 	88	Otto	Stoessl	 (1875–1936),	Austrian	novelist	 and	essayist.	Kafka
enclosed	a	clipping	from	the	publishers’	catalogue,	Das	Buch	des
Jahres	1912,	which	showed	a	picture	of	Stoessl	accompanied	by	a
quotation	from	a	review	of	his	novel	Morgenrot	[At	Sunrise].

		89	Not	identified.
		90	Cf.	Diaries	(September	25,	1912),	I,	p.	278,	on	his	first	reading	the
story	 to	 his	 friends:	 “There	 were	 tears	 in	 my	 eyes.	 The
indubitability	of	the	story	was	confirmed.”

	 	 91	 Refers	 to	 Yüan	 Tzu-tsai’s	 poem	 “In	 the	 Dead	 of	 Night.”	 See
Kafka’s	letter	of	November	24,	1912.

		92	See	Kafka’s	letter	of	November	15,	1912.
		93	Presumably	the	public	reading	of	Prague	authors	on	December	4.



	 	 94	 Paul	 Wiegler	 (1878–1949),	 author,	 critic,	 and	 translator.	 His
review	 appeared	 in	Bohemia,	 December	 6,	 1912,	 p.	 12;	 he	 says
about	 Kafka:	 “His	 short	 story	 ‘The	 Judgment’	 demonstrates	 the
appearance	 of	 a	 great,	 surprisingly	 great	 talent,	 passionate	 and
disciplined,	which	already	has	the	strength	to	go	its	own	way.”

		95	A	seaside	resort	on	the	island	of	Rügen.
		96	A	popular	card	game.
		97	Feast	of	Lights,	commemorating	the	rededication	of	the	temple	in
Jerusalem	by	Judah	the	Maccabee	(164	B.C.).

		98	The	Sanatorium	Just,	June	1912.
		99	See	Kafka’s	second	letter	of	November	28,	1912.
100	 Kafka	 here	 uses	 the	 formal	 Sie	 since	 the	 open	 postcard	 was
addressed	to	Felice’s	office.

101	The	publicity	postcard	of	the	Berlin	weekly	Die	Aktion	showed	a
portrait	 drawing	 of	 August	 Strindberg	 by	 Max	 Oppenheimer
(1885–1954).	 Ensam	 (1903)	 is	 not	 a	 short	 story,	 but	 the	 last
volume	of	his	autobiographical	novels.

102	The	widow	of	Kafka’s	uncle,	Heinrich	Kafka,	lived	in	Leitmeritz;
she	had	married	again.

103	See	note	88,	1912.
104	 Wilhelm	 Herzog	 (1884–1960),	 German	 editor	 and	 critic.	 His
article	 “Was	 ist	 modern?”	 [“What	 is	 Modern?”]	 appeared	 in
Berliner	Tageblatt,	December	10,	1912.

105	Der	Weltfreund	 (Berlin,	 1911),	 poems	 by	 Franz	Werfel,	 his	 first
book.

106	The	original	edition	of	Meditation	bears	the	dedication	“To	M.B.”
[Max	Brod].

107	Not	identified.
108	Maximilian	Harden	(1861–1927),	influential	writer	and	editor	of
the	political	weekly	Die	Zukunft	(1892–1922).

109	Much-frequented	resort	in	the	Riesen	Gebirge.
110	Felice’s	younger	sister	who	was	also	a	typist	at	the	Carl	Lindström
concern	in	Berlin.

111	Mountain	pass	and	resort	south	of	Vienna.
112	Section	of	Berlin.



113	See	note	12,	1912;	both	Austria	and	Russia	had	begun	to	mobilize
in	late	November	and	early	December	1912.

114	The	Alchimistengässchen	near	the	cathedral.	Later	Ottla	rented	a
house	 on	 this	 street,	 where	 Kafka	 did	 his	 writing	 during	 the
winter	1916–17.

115	 See	 letter	 of	 December	 25–26,	 first	 paragraph;	 the	 fragment	 of
this	story	seems	not	to	have	been	preserved.

116	 Felix	 Weltsch	 (1884–1964),	 author	 of	 philosophical	 works	 and
librarian	at	Prague	University;	wrote	extensively	on	Kafka.

117	The	Sanatorium	Just.
118	December	26.
119	The	two	questions	(Berliner	Tageblatt,	December	25,	1912,	Section
4)	 were:	 “Should	 he	 be	 handsome?	 Should	 she	 be	 intelligent?”
Answers	were	sent	 in	by	a	number	of	prominent	writers,	among
them	Franz	Werfel.

120	Cf.	Amerika,	pp.	247	ff.,	and	Diaries	(June	2,	1912),	I,	p.	263.	On
June	1,	1912,	Kafka	attended	a	lecture	by	the	Czech	politician	Dr.
František	Soukup	on	“America	and	 Its	Officials,”	 from	which	he
learned	about	such	demonstrations.

121	Ricarda	Huch	(1864–1947),	German	novelist	and	historian.
122	 Selma	 Lagerlöf	 (1858–1940),	 Swedish	 author,	 awarded	 Nobel
Prize	in	1914.

123	Jens	Peter	Jacobsen	(1847–85),	Danish	poet	and	novelist,	author
of	Gurrelieder.

124	Herbert	 Eulenberg;	 see	 note	 80,	 1912.	His	Schattenbilder	 (1910,
1912,	and	1915),	brief	vignettes	of	cultural	history,	were	widely
read	at	the	time.

125	Until	1918	a	toll	was	collected	on	all	Prague	bridges	(except	the
Charles	Bridge).

126	The	book	was	Robert	Rehlen,	ed.,	Berühmte	Aussprüche	und	Worte
Napoleons	 von	 Corsika	 bis	 St.	 Helena	 [Famous	 Utterances	 and
Sayings	of	Napoleon	from	Corsica	to	St.	Helena],	Leipzig,	1906.

127	Suburb	of	Berlin.



1913
				1	In	1913	Herbert	Eulenberg	was	awarded	the	Volks-Schiller	Prize
for	his	play	Belinde.

	 	 	 	 2	 The	 image	 obviously	 refers	 to	 the	 photograph	 mentioned	 in
Kafka’s	letter	of	December	3,	1912.

				3	See	letter	of	December	29–30,	1912.
				4	Allusion	to	a	scene	in	Amerika,	p.	253.
				5	Cf.	Amerika,	pp.	262	ff.
				6	See	note	23,	1912.
	 	 	 	 7	 At	 the	 time	 the	 president	 of	 the	Workers’	 Accident	 Insurance
Institute	 was	 Dr.	 Otto	 Přibram.	 His	 son,	 Ewald	 Přibram,	 was	 a
friend	 of	 Kafka’s	 during	 the	 last	 gymnasium	 years	 and	 at	 the
university.	See	Kafka’s	letter	of	March	10–11,	1913.

				8	Ola	Hansson,	“Erinnerungen	an	Strindberg,”	Die	Neue	Rundschau,
No.	11	(1912),	1536	ff.,	and	No.	12	(1912),	1724	ff.

				9	Cf.	“Letter	to	His	Father,”	in	Dearest	Father,	p.	165.
	 	10	“Der	Mythos	der	Juden”	[“Myth	 in	Judaism”],	address	given	at
the	Bar	Kochba	Society.	Published	 in	part	 in	Vom	Judentum:	Ein
Sammelbuch	[On	Jewishness:	A	Collection	of	Essays],	edited	by	the
Association	 of	 Jewish	 Students	 Bar	 Kochba	 in	 Prague	 (Leipzig,
1913),	pp.	21	ff.	The	English	version	appears	in	Martin	Buber,	On
Judaism	(New	York,	1967),	pp.	95–107.

		11	Kafka	refers	to	the	edition	of	Education	sentimentale	which	was	of
interest	because	of	its	“crossed-out”	lines	and	appendix.

		12	Chinesische	Geister-	und	Liebesgeschichten,	edited	and	introduced	by
Martin	Buber	(Frankfurt	am	Main,	1911);	a	similar	collection	of
stories,	 edited	 and	 translated	 by	 Rose	 Quong,	 and	 with	 Martin
Buber’s	original	introduction,	was	published	as	Chinese	Ghost	and
Love	Stories	(New	York,	1946).

	 	 13	 Gertrude	 Eysoldt	 (1870–1955),	 member	 of	 the	 Reinhardt
Ensemble	in	Berlin.

		14	Hugo	von	Hofmannsthal’s	Jedermann	was	performed	at	the	Neue
Deutsche	Theater	in	Prague	on	May	12,	1912.

	 	15	Die	Gartenlaube,	 a	 family	magazine,	widely	 read	 by	 the	middle



classes	in	the	nineteenth	century.
	 	 16	 Johann	 Ludwig	 Uhland	 (1787–1862),	 German	 poet	 and
philologist;	Jean	Paul	(Jean	Paul	Friedrich	Richter,	1763–1825),
German	novelist;	Johann	Gottfried	Seume	(1763–1810),	German
author;	 Friedrich	 Rückert	 (1788–1866),	 German	 poet	 and
Orientalist,	 author	 of	 anti-Napoleonic	 sonnets	 (“Bard”)	 and	 The
Wisdom	of	the	Brahmin	(“Brahmin”).

	 	 17	 The	 Ballets	 Russes	 gave	 performances	 at	 the	 Neue	 Deutsche
Theater	 in	 Prague	 in	 the	 spring	 of	 1910.	 See	 Kafka’s	 remarks
about	Eugenie	Eduardova	in	Diaries	(1910),	I,	pp.	9	ff.

	 	 18	 Tamara	 Karsavina	 (1885–),	 successor	 of	 Pavlova	 in	 the	 Ballets
Russes.

		19	Emile	Jaques-Dalcroze	(1865–1950),	Swiss	composer	and	teacher
of	 eurythmics;	 in	 1910	 be	 founded	 his	 own	 school	 in	 Hellerau
near	Dresden.	Kafka	visited	it	in	1914.

		20	See	Kafka’s	letter	of	January	14–15,	1913.
		21	See	Kafka’s	letter	of	November	24,	1912.
		22	Waslaw	Nijinsky	(1890–1950),	star	of	Diaghilev’s	Ballets	Russes.
		23	Lydia	Kyast	(1885–1959).
	 	 24	 In	 all	 probability	 the	 novel	 (Amerika)	 so	 often	 mentioned	 in
previous	letters.

		25	Obviously	Chinese	Ghost	and	Love	Stories.	See	note	12,	1913.
		26	Buber	had	published	two	books	of	hasidic	legends,	Die	Geschichten
des	 Rabbi	 Nachman,	 ihm	 nacherzählt,	 Frankfurt	 am	 Main,	 1906
[Tales	of	Rabbi	Nachman,	New	York,	1956],	 and	Die	 Legende	 des
Baalschem,	Frankfurt	am	Main,	1908	[The	Legend	of	the	Baal	Shem,
New	York,	1955].

		27	See	Kafka’s	letter	of	November	24,	1912.
		28	In	German	Hörmuschel	(“listening	shell”).—Trans.
		29	An	animated-picture	viewing	device	in	which	a	series	of	views	is
printed	on	paper	and	mounted	around	the	periphery	of	a	wheel;
the	 wheel	 is	 turned	 rapidly,	 thus	 giving	 the	 impression	 of
animation.

		30	See	Kafka’s	letter	of	November	24,	1912.
		31	Gertrude	Kircheisen,	Die	Frauen	um	Napoleon	(Munich,	1912).



		32	Friedrich	Hebbel	(1813–63),	German	dramatist.	A	critical	edition
of	his	letters	and	diaries	began	to	appear	in	1911.

		33	Max	Brod,	Ein	tschechisches	Dienstmädchen	(Berlin,	1909).
	 	34	Otto	Pick’s	 review	of	Meditation	 in	Bohemia,	 January	30,	1913.
For	Pick,	see	note	39,	1913.

	 	 35	 Intended	 for	 Felice’s	mother,	who	 secretly	 read	Kafka’s	 letters.
See	Kafka’s	remark	in	his	letter	of	December	14–15,	1912.

		36	This	letter	has	not	been	preserved.
		37	See	note	105,	1912.
		38	Kurt	Pinthus	(1886–),	publicist	and	critic,	at	the	time	a	reader	for
Kurt	Wolff.

		39	Otto	Pick	(1887–1940),	Freundliches	Erleben.	Pick	was	a	Bohemian
poet	and	writer,	and	a	translator	from	the	Czech.

		40	The	literary	supplement	of	the	Berliner	Tageblatt.
		41	The	family	of	Kafka’s	friend	Felix	Weltsch.
	 	 42	 Felix	 Weltsch	 and	 Max	 Brod,	Anschauung	 und	 Begriff	 (Leipzig,
1913);	the	volume	was	published	by	Kurt	Wolff	in	the	latter	part
of	February	1913.

		43	Hermann	Cohen	(1842–1918),	Logik	der	reinen	Erkenntnis	(System
der	Philosophie,	Vol.	I),	1902.

		44	Probably	“The	Stoker,”	the	first	chapter	of	Amerika.
		45	Heinrich	von	Kleist’s	(1777–1811)	short	story	“Michael	Kohlhaas”
(English	translation	by	Martin	Greenberg	 in	Heinrich	von	Kleist,
The	 Marquise	 of	 O—and	 Other	 Stories,	 New	 York,	 1960);	 Kafka
gave	 a	 reading	 of	 the	 beginning	 of	 the	 story	 in	 mid-December
1913	in	Toynbee	Hall,	Prague.	See	Diaries	(December	11,	1913),
I,	p.	320.

		46	Otto	Pick’s	review	of	Meditation	in	the	Budapest	newspaper	Pester
Lloyd,	February	9,	1913.

	 	 47	 Egon	 Erwin	 Kisch	 (1885–1948),	 journalist,	 developed	 a	 timely
style	of	reportage	as	a	vehicle	of	social	criticism.

	 	 48	 Else	 Lasker-Schüler	 (1876–1945),	 author	 of	 poetry,	 plays,	 and
short	stories.

		49	Not	identified.
	 	 50	 Hidalla	 oder	 Sein	 und	 Haben	 [Hidallah,	 or	 Being	 and	 Having]



(1904),	 drama	 by	 Frank	 Wedekind	 (1864–1918).	 The	 first
performance	 in	Prague	took	place	at	 the	Neue	Deutsche	Theater
on	 February	 12,	 1913.	 Wedekind	 often	 acted	 in	 his	 own	 plays
alongside	his	wife,	Tilly	(Mathilde	Newes).

		51	Arthur	Schnitzler	(1862–1931),	Austrian	playwright	and	novelist.
The	 works	 here	 mentioned	 are	 the	 plays	 Professor	 Bernhardi
(1912),	Zwischenspiel	(1906),	Der	Ruf	des	Lebens	(1906),	Der	junge
Medardus	 (1910),	 Anatol	 (1893),	 and	 Reigen	 (1900);	 and	 the
novella	Lieutenant	Gustl	(1901).

		52	Princess	Viktoria	Luise	and	her	fiancé,	Prince	Ernst	August,	Duke
of	Brunswick	and	Lüneburg.

		53	Max	Brod’s	review	of	Meditation,	“Das	Ereignis	eines	Buches”	[“A
Literary	Event”],	in	März,	No.	7	(February	1913),	268	ff.

		54	The	letter	of	February	14–15.	See	note	56,	1913.
		55	In	his	postcard	to	Max	and	Elsa	Brod	of	February	4,	1913	(Briefe,
p.	113).

		56	The	letter	of	February	14–15,	which	was	intended	to	reach	Felice
on	Sunday.

	 	 57	 Kafka’s	 faith	 was	 soon	 shaken:	 see	 his	 letter	 of	 March	 17–18,
1913.

	 	 58	 Kafka	 was	 made	 vice-secretary	 of	 the	 Workers’	 Accident
Insurance	Institute	on	March	1,	1913.	His	detailed	application	for
a	raise	and	a	promotion	of	December	11,	1912,	was	published	by
Jaromír	Louěžil	in	the	magazine	Sborník	Národního	Musea	v	Praze,
VIII,	No.	2	(1963),	65	ff.

	 	59	Probably	 the	concluding	 section	of	The	Metamorphosis;	 see	 note
71,	1912.

		60	The	unfinished	story	about	Ernst	Liman.	See	Diaries	(February	28,
1913),	I,	pp.	280	ff.

		61	Felice’s	sister	Else,	in	Budapest.
	 	62	A	 film	 after	 a	 play,	Der	Andere	 (1893),	 by	 Paul	 Lindau	 (1839–
1919);	Albert	Bassermann	(1867–1952)	played	the	leading	part.

	 	63	 In	December	1910	Kafka	had	seen	a	production	of	Hamlet	with
Bassermann	 in	 the	 title	 role;	 see	 his	 postcard	 to	 Max	 Brod	 of
December	9,	1910	(Briefe,	p.	84).

	 	 64	 Tragedy	 (1847)	 by	 Karl	 Gutzkow	 (1811–78).	 Uriel	 Acosta	 (c.



1585–1640)	 was	 a	 Portuguese	 philosopher	 of	 Marrano	 parents
who	 reconverted	 from	 Catholicism	 to	 Judaism,	 moved	 to
Amsterdam,	 and	 was	 excommunicated	 by	 the	 Amsterdam
synagogue	as	an	atheist.

		65	There	are	no	entries	in	Kafka’s	diaries	between	February	28	and
May	2,	1913.

		66	Novel	(1774)	by	Goethe.
		67	Oskar	Baum’s	short	story	“Die	Fremde”	[“The	Strange	Girl”]	was
published	 in	 Bohemia,	 March	 13,	 1913;	 on	 the	 same	 day	 Felix
Weltsch’s	essay	on	Henri	Bergson	appeared	in	the	Prager	Tagblatt.

		68	See	Kafka’s	letter	of	February	18–19,	1913.
	 	69	The	 two	clippings	enclosed	with	Kafka’s	 letter	of	March	13–14,
1913;	see	note	67,	1913.

		70	An	article	by	Max	Brod	published	in	the	Berliner	Tageblatt,	March
13,	1913.

	 	 71	 Max	 Brod,	 “Zur	 Charakteristik	 der	 österreichischen	 Familie”
[“Characteristics	 of	 the	 Austrian	 Family”],	 Berliner	 Tageblatt,
March	23,	1913,	Section	4.

		72	Kafka	had	a	German	translation	of	the	letters	(Berlin,	1912)	in	his
library.

		73	Good	Friday.
		74	The	letter	was	delivered	by	messenger.
		75	František	Khol	(1877–1930),	librarian	at	the	National	Museum	in
Prague	(1904–15)	later	literary	adviser	to	the	National	Theater.

		76	Slightly	misquoted;	literally:	“Look	at	the	beautiful	female	head—
with	 black	 curls—in	 magnificent	 coloring—against	 a	 dark
background”	 (Goethe,	 Gedenkausgabe,	 XXIII	 [Zurich,	 1950],	 p.
864).

	 	77	 In	Austrian	usage	Gasse	 (alley)	 is	 the	 common	word	 for	Strasse
(street).	Wherever	the	translation	says	“street”	Kafka	uses	Gasse.
During	 his	 visit	 to	 Berlin,	 Felice	 obviously	 mentioned	 that	 in
German	the	correct	word	is	Strasse.

	 	 78	 See	 Kafka’s	 letter	 to	 Max	 Brod	 of	 April	 3,	 1913:	 “Yesterday	 I
wrote	my	great	confession	to	Berlin	…”	(Briefe,	p.	115).

		79	In	early	April	the	Bauer	family	moved	from	Immanuelkirchstrasse
29,	Berlin	N.E.,	to	Berlin-Charlottenburg,	Wilmersdorferstrasse	73



(corner	of	Mommsenstrasse).
		80	This	writer	was	the	Czech	novelist	Petr	Dejmek	(1870–1945);	the
novel	alluded	to	by	Kafka	 is	Hry	se	srdcem	[Playing	with	Hearts],
Prague,	 1913.	The	 title	 page	of	 the	book	 shows	 a	 lady	 juggling
with	four	burning	hearts.

		81	Kurt	Wolff	had	taken	over	Ernst	Rowohlt	Verlag	on	November	2,
1912,	and	changed	its	name	to	Kurt	Wolff	Verlag	on	February	15,
1913.

	 	 82	 The	 story	 “Der	Gast”	 [“The	Guest”]	 by	 Friedrich	Huch	 (1873–
1913),	in	Die	Neue	Rundschau,	No.	4	(April	1913),	457	ff.

	 	 83	A	 review	by	Albert	 Ehrenstein	 of	 Kafka’s	Meditation	 in	Berliner
Tageblatt,	April	16,	1913,	Section	4.	Kafka	considered	Ehrenstein’s
review	along	with	Max	Brod’s	as	the	“most	kind”	of	all	(see	Briefe,
p.	135).

	 	 84	 Kurt	 Wolff	 wrote	 to	 Kafka	 on	 April	 16,	 1913,	 promising	 to
combine	 the	 three	 stories	 “The	 Metamorphosis,”	 “The	 Stoker,”
and	“The	Judgment”	in	one	volume	(Kurt	Wolff:	Briefwechsel	eines
Verlegers,	 1911–1963	 [Kurt	 Wolff:	 Correspondence	 of	 a	 Publisher,
1911–1963],	 edited	 by	 Bernhard	 Zeller	 and	 Ellen	 Otten
[Frankfurt	 am	Main,	 1966],	 pp.	 30	 f.;	 hereafter	 cited	 as	Wolff,
Briefwechsel).	Subsequently	Kafka	abandoned	the	idea	and	in	the
end	all	 three	 stories	were	published	 separately	 in	 the	 series	Der
jüngste	Tag.

		85	Kafka’s	uncle	Alfred	Löwy	in	Madrid.
		86	The	new	apartment	of	the	Bauer	family	was	much	closer	than	the
former	one	to	the	Askanische	Hof	where	Kafka	used	to	stay.

		87	On	the	occasion	of	the	engagement	of	Felice’s	brother,	Ferdinand.
		88	See	note	47,	1912.
		89	City	28	miles	northeast	of	Berlin,	a	summer	resort	for	Berliners.
		90	Presumably	Max	Brod’s	review	of	Meditation;	see	note	53,	1913.
	 	 91	 May	 16,	 the	 feast	 day	 of	 St.	 John	 of	 Nepomuk	 (1340?–93?),
patron	saint	of	Bohemia.

		92	Kafka	is	alluding	to	his	relationship	with	a	woman	in	Zuckmantel
where	 he	 spent	 his	 summer	 vacations	 in	 1905	 and	1906.	Kafka
mentions	 the	woman	twice	 in	his	Diaries	 (January	24,	1915),	 II,
p.	112:	“…	that	sweetness	one	experiences	in	a	relationship	with



a	 woman	 one	 loves,	 such	 as	 I	 had	 in	 Zuckmantel”;	 and	 (July
1916),	II,	p.	159:	“I	have	never	yet	been	intimate	with	a	woman
apart	from	that	time	in	Zuckmantel.…	[She]	was	a	woman,	and	I
was	 ignorant.”	 See	 also	 Kafka’s	 letter	 to	Max	 Brod	 of	 mid-July
1916	(Briefe,	p.	139).

	 	93	The	 second	of	 the	 unmailed	 letters	 from	 the	 “month’s	waiting-
time”	(September	28	to	October	23,	1912);	see	enclosure	with	the
letter	of	December	20–21,	1912.

		94	In	this	letter	the	formal	Sie	is	of	course	used.
		95	See	note	31,	1912.
		96	The	evening	took	place	on	June	2,	1913,	at	the	Hotel	Bristol	 in
Prague.	See	Appendix.	Löwy	recited,	sang,	and	performed.

		97	The	story	“The	Judgment”	was	written	two	days	after	Kafka’s	first
letter	to	Felice,	during	the	night	of	September	22–23,	1912.

	 	 98	 Friede=peace;	 Glück=happiness	 (Latin:	 felicitas);	 Feld=field;
Bauer=peasant.

		99	hinabfallen=to	drop,	to	fall;	hinfallen=to	fall	to	the	ground.
100	Probably	the	announcement	in	the	Prager	Tagblatt	of	June	1,	1913
(see	Appendix);	no	other	has	been	found.

101	Kafka	began	this	 letter	no	later	than	June	10.	See	his	remark	in
the	letter	of	June	10:	“I	am	preparing	a	treatise	which	is	not	yet
ready.”	The	date	June	16,	1913,	appears	at	the	end	of	the	letter.

102	See	Kafka’s	letter	of	May	15,	1913.
103	In	the	Central	European	railway	systems,	a	ticket	was	required	to
enter	the	platforms.

104	Railroads	in	Central	Europe	had	four	classes,	the	fourth	being	the
cheapest.

105	A	review	by	Heinrich	Eduard	Jacob	(1889–1967)	in	the	issue	of
June	16,	1913.

106	Suburb	of	Berlin.
107	Resort	on	the	island	of	Sylt	where	Felice	spent	her	vacation	from
August	1	to	17.

108	See	Diaries	(July	1913),	I,	p.	292:	“The	fear	of	the	connection,	of
passing	into	the	other.	Then	I’ll	never	be	alone	again”	(Point	5	in
the	 “Summary	 of	 all	 the	 arguments	 for	 and	 against	 my
marriage”).



109	 At	 that	 time	 the	 summer	 house	 of	 the	 Kafka	 family	 was	 in
Radešovice	(the	picture	postcard	shows	a	view	of	“Landscape	and
villas	of	Radešovice”),	a	small	village	southeast	of	Prague.

110	Apparently	the	“latest	plan”	in	the	preceding	letter,	which	Kafka
seems	to	have	mailed	after	the	postcard.

111	See	note	5,	1912.
112	The	correct	address	was	Niklasstrasse	36.
113	 Kafka	 had	 spent	 his	 vacation	 in	 September	 1909	 together	with
Max	and	Otto	Brod	in	Riva	on	Lake	Garda.

114	 J.	 P.	 Müller,	 a	 Danish	 teacher	 of	 gymnastics,	 invented	 special
indoor	 exercises	 which	 were	 widely	 popular.	 Kafka	 used	 the
system	from	about	1909	on.	The	System	für	Frauen	was	published
in	1913.

115	Village	three	miles	north	of	Westerland,	on	Sylt.
116	 Quoted	 from	 Gustav	 Roskoff	 (1814–89),	 Geschichte	 des	 Teufels
[History	of	 the	Devil],	Leipzig,	1869,	 I,	p.	326.	The	parenthetical
remark	is	Kafka’s.

117	Paul	Friedrich,	 “Gleichnisse	und	Betrachtungen,”	Das	 literarische
Echo,	XV,	No.	22	(August	15,	1913),	1547	ff.

118	This	letter	has	not	been	preserved.
119	A	poem	by	Max	Brod,	“Lugano-See”	[“Lake	Lugano”],	dedicated
to	Franz	Kafka,	 and	published	 in	März,	VII	 (August	1913),	247;
reprinted	in	Brod,	Biography,	pp.	80	f.

120	See	Diaries	(August	21,	1913),	I,	pp.	298	ff.
121	See	the	following	letter.	Kafka	had	first	mentioned	his	 intention
to	 write	 to	 Felice’s	 father	 on	 May	 16,	 1913,	 and	 may	 have
discussed	the	idea	with	her	during	his	visit	to	Berlin	at	Whitsun.

122	Franz	Grillparzer	(1791–1872),	Austrian	dramatist	and	poet.
123	See	note	45,	1913.	Felice’s	sister	Erna	told	the	editors	that	Kafka
visited	Kleist’s	grave	on	the	Wannsee	with	her.	She	remembered
his	 having	 tarried	 there	 for	 a	 long	 time	 “deeply	 immersed	 in
thought.”

124	 The	 Second	 International	 Congress	 for	 First	 Aid	 and	 Accident
Prevention	 took	 place	 in	 Vienna,	 September	 2–9,	 1913.	 At	 the
same	 time	 the	 Eleventh	 Zionist	 Congress	was	 held,	 a	 session	 of
which	Kafka	attended	on	September	8.



125	Heinrich	Laube	(1806–84),	writer	and	for	many	years	director	of
the	 Burgtheater,	 Vienna.	 The	 remark	 occurs	 in	 his	 Grillparzers
Lebensgeschichte	(Stuttgart,	1884),	p.	164.

126	The	House	of	 Parliament	 in	Vienna,	 built	 1873–83	by	Theophil
Hansen	(1813–91).

127	Suburb	of	Vienna.
128	 The	 sister	 of	 the	 writer	 Robert	 Weltsch	 (1891–)	 and	 cousin	 of
Kafka’s	friend	Felix	Weltsch;	later	married	the	Beethoven	scholar
Siegmund	Kaznelson;	see	letter	of	June	10–16,	1913.

129	Albert	Ehrenstein	(1886–1950),	Austrian	poet	and	writer;	see	also
note	83,	1913.

130	Industrial	suburb	of	Vienna.
131	A	vegetarian	restaurant	on	Opolzer	Strasse,	Vienna.
132	Wooded	amusement	park	in	Vienna.
133	 Play	 (1902)	 by	 Maurice	 Maeterlinck	 (1862–1949),	 much
performed	at	the	time.

134	Not	identified.
135	Town	at	the	south	end	of	Lake	Garda.
136	 Much-frequented	 winter	 resort	 on	 the	 western	 shore	 of	 Lake
Garda.

137	Kafka	found	the	letter	shortly	thereafter	and	enclosed	it	with	his
letter	of	November	6,	1913.

138	Kafka	mentions	the	girl	again	in	Diaries	(December	14,	1913),	 I,
p.	322.

139	 The	 next	 day	 Kafka	 went	 from	 Desenzano	 to	 Riva	 to	 Dr.	 von
Hartungen’s	Sanatorium.

140	 Ernst	 Weiss	 (1884–1940),	 novelist	 and	 physician	 in	 Berlin,	 a
native	of	Brno.	Kafka	 first	met	him	late	 in	June	1913	 in	Prague
and	again	in	September	of	the	same	year	in	Vienna	in	the	circle
of	 Albert	 Ehrenstein,	 Felix	 Stössinger,	 and	 Otto	 Pick.	 See	 also
Diaries	(January	24,	1915),	II,	p.	113.

141	Kafka’s	room	in	the	Oppelt	house	on	Niklasstrasse	at	the	corner	of
Altstädter	Ring	opposite	the	Niklaskirche.

142	Dr.	Hans	Bloch	(1891–1943),	physician	in	Berlin;	Zionist.
143	 Presumably	 four	 of	 Kafka’s	 letters	 to	 Felice,	 written	 between



November	 27	 and	December	 29,	 are	missing.	 Kafka	 enumerates
these	in	his	letter	to	Grete	Bloch	of	January	28,	1914.

144	Kafka	mentions	the	encounter	with	the	Swiss	girl	several	times	in
his	diaries	(October	15,	20,	and	22,	1913)	and	once	in	a	letter	to
Max	Brod,	September	28,	1913	(Diaries,	I,	pp.	301,	303	ff.;	II,	p.
220;	 Briefe,	 p.	 121).	 Kafka	 promised	 her	 never	 to	 mention	 her
name	(Diaries,	I,	p.	304),	and	referred	to	her	only	by	initials	(W.
or	G.W.).

1914
				1	Mailed	only	on	January	26.
				2	Apparently	Felice	used	the	German	idiom	“wie	die	Katze	um	den
heissen	 Brei	 gehen”	 [“to	 skirt	 the	 hot	 pap	 like	 a	 cat”=to	 beat
about	the	bush].

				3	See	the	draft	of	a	letter	to	Grete	Bloch	of	December	15/16,	1913,
which	was	found	among	Kafka’s	papers.

				4	See	Diaries	(December	12,	14,	15,	and	17,	1913),	I,	pp.	321	ff.
				5	Die	Galeere	[The	Galley],	Ernst	Weiss’s	first	novel,	was	published
in	1913.

				6	The	letter	of	December	29,	1913	to	January	2,	1914.
				7	The	hotel	where	Grete	Bloch	stayed	during	her	visit	to	Prague	at
the	beginning	of	November	1913.

	 	 	 	8	After	his	death,	Grillparzer’s	apartment	at	Spiegelgasse	21	was
transferred	to	the	Historical	Museum	of	the	City	of	Vienna,	which
is	located	in	the	New	City	Hall.

				9	This	letter	has	not	been	preserved.	Kafka	mentions	it	again	in	his
letters	to	Grete	Bloch	of	March	3	and	9,	1914.

		10	See	also	Diaries	(March	1914),	II,	pp.	24	ff.
		11	At	their	first	meeting	in	Prague,	early	November	1913.
	 	 12	 Otto	 Wagner	 (1841–1918),	 Austrian	 pioneer	 of	 modern
architecture.	The	Postal	Savings	Bank	was	built	in	1905.

	 	13	Kafka	quotes	the	telegram	in	his	 letter	 to	Grete	Bloch	of	March
13,	1914.



		14	First	station	on	the	Austrian	side	along	the	Prague–Vienna	line.
		15	The	enclosure	has	not	been	preserved.
		16	There	is	an	echo	of	this	thought	in	the	concluding	chapter	of	The
Trial.	The	novel	was	largely	written	during	the	second	half	of	this
year	after	the	engagement	was	broken	off.

		17	Muzzi	(or	Wilma),	mentioned	several	times	later	on,	was	Felice’s
niece,	the	daughter	of	her	eldest	sister,	Else	Braun.

		18	City	in	central	Germany	southeast	of	Brunswick.
		19	Kafka’s	letter	to	Felice	of	March	21,	1914.
	 	20	The	unofficial	engagement	took	place	 in	Berlin	on	Easter	(April
12–13),	1914.

	 	 21	 Felice’s	 fifth	 anniversary	 as	 an	 employee	 of	 Carl	 Lindström	 in
August	1914.

		22	Lake	on	the	outskirts	of	Berlin.
		23	The	official	engagement	celebration	among	family	and	friends.
	 	 24	 Presumably	 The	 Metamorphosis,	 although	 it	 was	 not	 published
until	October	1915,	in	the	monthly	magazine	Die	weissen	Blätter.

		25	“Die	Aeroplane	in	Brescia,”	published	in	Bohemia,	September	28,
1909,	and	the	story	written	jointly	with	Max	Brod,	“Richard	und
Samuel,”	published	in	Herder	Blätter,	I,	No.	3	(May	1912).	English
versions	(“The	Aeroplanes	at	Brescia”	and	“The	First	Long	Train
Journey”)	appear	in	The	Penal	Colony,	pp.	297	ff.,	279	ff.

	 	 26	Max	 Brod’s	 novel	Tycho	 Brahes	Weg	 zu	 Gott,	 first	 published	 in
installments	 in	Die	weissen	 Blätter	 (January–June	 1915),	 then	 in
book	form	by	Kurt	Wolff,	1916.	The	novel	carries	the	dedication
“To	my	friend	Franz	Kafka.”

	 	27	Kafka’s	uncles	Siegfried	Löwy,	a	country	doctor	 in	Triesch	near
Iglau	in	Moravia,	and	Rudolf	Löwy,	a	bookkeeper	in	Prague.

		28	An	inconspicuous	notice	appeared	in	the	Prager	Tagblatt	of	Friday,
April	24,	1914:	“Dr.	Franz	Kafka,	Vice-Secretary	of	the	Workers’
Accident	 Insurance	 Institute,	has	become	engaged	to	Miss	Felice
Bauer	of	Berlin.”

	 	 29	 Kafka	 refers	 to	 the	 verbal	 extravagances	 of	 metropolitan
Germans.

		30	Ernst	Hardt	(1876–1947),	German	neo-Romantic	author	of	plays,
poems,	and	stories.



	 	 31	 Grillparzer,	 briefly	 engaged	 but	 never	 married	 to	 Katharina
Fröhlich,	maintained	 a	 close	 relationship	with	 her	 and	 her	 two
sisters.	The	note	mentioned	by	Kafka	was	found	after	Grillparzer’s
death	 and	 first	 published	 in	 Heinrich	 Laube’s	 biography,	 p.	 65
(see	note	125,	1913).

		32	Der	Kampf	[The	Struggle],	Berlin,	1916.
		33	See	note	91,	1913.
		34	Location	of	the	vegetarian	restaurant	Thalisia	in	Vienna.
	 	 35	 The	 private	 collection	 of	 the	 princes	 of	 Liechtenstein,	 now
removed	to	Vaduz,	Lichtenstein.	At	 times	 the	gallery	was	closed
to	the	public.

	 	 36	 The	 almanac	 of	 the	 publishing	 house	 S.	 Fischer,	Das	 27.	 Jahr
(Berlin,	1913),	p.	289.

		37	A	sister	of	Felice’s	father.
		38	Probably	the	Berliner	Zeitung	of	May	9,	1914,	which	contained	a
review	 of	 The	 Stoker	 by	 Camill	 Hoffmann,	 one	 of	 Kafka’s
acquaintances	in	Prague.

	 	39	This	 letter,	probably	written	soon	after	March	1,	1914,	has	not
been	preserved.

		40	Play	by	Frank	Wedekind,	written	in	1911,	published	in	1912,	and
first	performed	in	Munich	on	November	30,	1912;	Max	Reinhardt
first	performed	it	in	Berlin	on	September	5,	1913.

		41	See	the	letter	to	Felice	of	February	23–24,	1913.
		42	Adler	was	the	Prague	representative	of	Carl	Lindström	A.G.
		43	Workers’	Accident	Insurance	Institute	of	the	Kingdom	of	Bohemia
in	Prague.

		44	Deutsche	Werkstätten	[German	Workshops],	founded	in	1911	by
Carl	 Camillo	 Schmidt-Hellerau	 (1872–1948),	 stressed	 modern
design	and	craftsmanship	in	furniture.

		45	Kafka’s	mother	and	his	sister	Ottla	were	already	in	Berlin.
		46	Kafka	seems	to	have	read	this	play	by	Hans	Bloch,	Grete	Bloch’s
brother,	in	manuscript.	It	was	never	published.

		47	Grete	Bloch’s	job	in	Vienna	had	been	with	Joe	Lesti	Successors.
		48	A	suburb	of	Dresden.	See	note	19,	1913.
		49	Presumably	the	answer	to	Kafka’s	letter	of	July	1,	1914.



	 	 50	 Kafka	 is	 referring	 to	 the	 self-confidence	 he	 derived	 from	 his
literary	 productivity	 at	 the	 time;	 see	 the	 letters	 to	 Felice	 of
November	1,	1912,	and	March	2–3,	3–4,	and	17–18,	1913.

	 	51	Franzensbad	 (Františkovy	Lázně),	 spa	 in	northwestern	Bohemia
near	the	Bavarian	border.

	 	 52	Written	 on	 the	 day	 after	 the	 engagement	 was	 broken	 off	 at	 a
conference	 in	 the	 Askanische	 Hof	 at	 which	 Grete	 Bloch	 and
Felice’s	 sister	 Erna	 were	 present.	 The	 letter	 was	 delivered	 by
messenger.	See	also	Diaries	(July	23	and	27,	1914),	II,	pp.	65	ff.

		53	Possibly	one	of	the	letters	to	Grete	Bloch	between	early	May	and
the	end	of	June	1914.	In	these	letters	a	number	of	lines	in	which
Kafka	voices	strong	doubts	about	the	feasibility	of	a	marriage	to
Felice	 are	 underlined	 in	 red,	 probably	 by	 Grete	 Bloch	 for	 the
purpose	 of	 quoting	 them	 at	 the	 “tribunal	 in	 the	 hotel”
(Askanische	 Hof).	 See	 Kafka’s	 letter	 to	 Grete	 Bloch	 of	 July	 3,
1914:	“You	needn’t	have	quoted	from	letters.”

		54	Kafka	used	to	give	small	loans	to	the	clerk	to	whom	he	dictated
and	persistently	refused	repayment.

		55	Kafka’s	brother-in-law,	Josef	Pollak.
		56	Böhmisch-Brod	(český-Brod),	small	town	east	of	Prague.
		57	See	Diaries	(October	15,	1914),	II,	p.	93,	where	Kafka	records	the

letter	from	memory.
		58	From	October	5	to	19,	1914.
		59	Kafka	liked	Erna	best	among	all	of	Felice’s	relatives.	At	his	first

visit	to	the	Bauer	family	at	Whitsun	1913,	she	was	kinder	to	him
than	 the	 rest	of	 the	 family.	When	he	departed	 from	Berlin	after
the	 engagement	 was	 dissolved,	 she	 accompanied	 him	 to	 the
station.	 “And	 E.	 is	 nice	 to	 me,	 believes	 in	 me	 for	 some
incomprehensible	 reason,	 in	 spite	 of	 having	 seen	me	 before	 the
tribunal	[the	confrontation	at	the	Askanische	Hof];	now	and	then
I	even	feel	the	effect	of	this	faith	in	me”	(Diaries	[July	28,	1914],
II,	pp.	68	f.).

		60	Carl	Bauer	died	suddenly	on	November	5,	1914,	of	a	heart	attack.
Kafka	 connected	 this	 death	 with	 the	 dissolution	 of	 the
engagement	and	considered	it	a	sign	of	the	“ruin”	he	brought	to
the	family;	see	Diaries	(December	5,	1914),	II,	pp.	99	f.



1915
	 	 	 	1	On	the	preceding	weekend	of	January	23–24,	Kafka	and	Felice
had	met	in	Bodenbach	(Děčín),	the	border	town	on	the	Bohemian
side	 of	 the	 Prague–Berlin	 railroad	 line.	 During	 the	 visit	 Kafka
read	 to	 Felice	 some	 of	 his	 works	 written	 in	 the	 second	 part	 of
1914,	 among	 them	“Before	 the	Law,”	which	was	 first	published
on	September	7,	1915,	in	the	Prague	weekly	Selbstwehr,	and	then
in	 December	 1915	 in	 Vom	 jüngsten	 Tag:	 Ein	 Almanach	 neuer
Dichtung	 (Leipzig,	 1916).	 See	Diaries	 (January	 24,	 1915),	 II,	 pp.
111	ff.

				2	Kafka’s	first	room	of	his	own	in	the	house	where	his	sister	Valli
Pollak	lived,	on	Bilekgasse.

				3	Compare	the	story	“My	Neighbor,”	in	The	Great	Wall	of	China,	pp.
127	ff.

				4	Possibly	parts	of	the	novel	The	Trial.
				5	In	the	house	“Zum	goldenen	Hecht”	[“At	the	Sign	of	the	Golden
Pike”]	at	Langegasse	705/18	(today	No.	16).	His	landlord’s	name
was	Salomon	Stein.	The	room,	a	corner	room	with	balcony	on	the
fifth	floor,	had	an	exceptional	view	of	the	roofs	and	towers	of	Old
Prague	and	the	Laurenziberg	across	the	Moldau.

				6	The	weekly	gathering	of	Brod,	Weltsch,	and	Baum,	which	Kafka
used	to	attend.	See	note	70,	1912.

	 	 	 	7	Kafka’s	brother-in-law	Karl	Hermann,	 the	husband	of	his	 sister
Elli,	did	service	in	the	Carpathians;	his	other	brother-in-law,	Josef
Pollak,	 Valli’s	 husband,	 had	 been	 slightly	 wounded	 (see	 Frau
Kafka’s	letter	to	Felice’s	mother,	November	27,	1914).

				8	Kafka	accompanied	his	eldest	sister,	Elli,	on	a	journey	to	Hungary
where	her	husband	was	stationed.

				9	Probably	Strindberg’s	Separated;	see	Diaries	(May	3	and	4,	1915),
II,	p.	126.

	 	 10	 Presumably	 the	 lines,	mentioned	 in	 this	 letter,	 that	 Felice	 had
written	in	an	edition	of	Flaubert’s	Salammbô	she	had	sent	him	as
a	present.

		11	The	German	im	Richtigen	is	a	literal	translation	of	the	expression
dans	le	vrai	as	used	by	Flaubert	in	a	statement	his	niece	Caroline



Commanville	quoted	in	her	Souvenirs	intimes,	a	book	Kafka	knew.
Kafka	 often	 used	 Flaubert’s	 phrase	 Ils	 sont	 dans	 le	 vrai	 in	 his
conversation.

	 	12	Presumably	Lily	Braun,	Memoiren	 einer	Sozialistin	[Memoirs	 of	 a
Socialist],	 2	 vols.,	 Munich,	 1909–11;	 see	 Kafka’s	 letter	 to	 M.E.
(November/December	1920),	Briefe,	p.	282.

	 	 13	 Kafka’s	 return	 trip	 from	 the	 joint	 excursion	 to	 Bohemian
Switzerland	during	Whitsun	(May	23–24),	1915.

		14	Heinrich	Weltsch,	the	father	of	Kafka’s	friend	Felix.
		15	Heine	used	the	lines	as	motto	for	Chapters	I,	II,	and	XX	of	“Ideas:
The	Book	Le	Grand”	(1826)	in	Part	II	of	his	Travel	Sketches.	They
come	from	the	tragedy	Die	Schuld,	IV,	9	(1816),	by	Adolf	Müllner
(1774–1829).

		16	Kafka	hoped	very	much	to	be	called	up,	among	other	reasons,	to
escape	from	the	existence	and	career	of	an	official.

	 	17	Apparently	Kafka	and	Felice	met	 in	Karlsbad	 in	June	1915;	 see
the	letter	of	August	9,	1915.

		18	From	July	20	to	31,	Kafka	stayed	at	a	sanatorium	at	Rumburg	in
northern	Bohemia.

		19	Refers	to	“Bachelor’s	Ill	Luck”	in	Meditation;	see	The	Penal	Colony,
p.	30.

		20	As	an	official	of	the	Insurance	Institute,	Kafka	was	exempted	from
military	service.

		21	Tycho	Brahes	Weg	zu	Gott;	see	note	26,	1914.
		22	Carl	Sternheim	(1878–1942)	received	the	Fontane	Prize	for	1915
for	 his	 three	 stories	 “Busekow”	 (1914),	 “Napoleon”	 (1915),	 and
“Schuhlin”	 (1916),	 published	 by	 Kafka’s	 publisher,	 Kurt	 Wolff;
collected	 in	 Sternheim,	 Die	 drei	 Erzählungen	 (Leipzig,	 1916).
Sternheim,	who	was	a	millionaire,	gave	the	prize	money	to	Kafka,
following	a	suggestion	by	Franz	Blei.

	 	 23	 The	 Metamorphosis,	 first	 published	 in	 Die	 weissen	 Blätter,	 X
(October	 1915),	 appeared	 as	 a	 double	 volume	 (22/23)	 in	 the
series	Der	jüngste	Tag	in	November	1915	(Kurt	Wolff,	Leipzig).

1916



	 	 	 	1	Vom	 jüngsten	Tag:	Ein	Almanach	neuer	Dichtung	 (Leipzig,	1916).
See	note	1,	1915.

				2	See	note	28,	1912.
	 	 	 	 3	During	 the	 trip	 to	Weimar	 Kafka	made	with	Max	 Brod	 in	 the

summer	of	1912;	see	note	2,	1912.
				4	Town	in	Silesia;	Max	and	Sophie	Friedmann	were	living	there	at

the	time.
	 	 	 	 5	 Because	 of	 the	 military	 censorship	 of	 the	 mails,	 letters	 from

Prague	 to	 Berlin	 often	 took	 five	 to	 seven	 days.	 Open	 postcards
passed	the	censor	more	quickly.

	 	 	 	6	Robert	Musil	 (1880–1942;	subsequently	 the	author	of	The	Man
Without	 Qualities)	 invited	 Kafka	 to	 contribute	 to	 a	 literary
magazine—possibly	Die	Neue	Rundschau—in	 February	 1914;	 see
Diaries	 (February	 23,	 1914),	 II,	 p.	 22.	 Musil	 reviewed	 Kafka’s
Meditation	 and	The	 Stoker	 in	 the	August	 1914	 issue	 of	Die	 Neue
Rundschau.

				7	Der	Kampf;	see	letter	of	May	12,	1914,	to	Grete	Bloch.	Weiss	sent
the	 book	 to	 Kafka,	who	 had	 read	 it	 in	manuscript,	 in	 the	 hope
that	 he	 would	 review	 it	 in	 Die	 weissen	 Blätter;	 an	 unpublished
letter	 from	 Ernst	 Weiss	 to	 Rahel	 Sansara	 of	 June	 27,	 1916,
indicates	that	Kafka	refused	to	do	so.

				8	A	fashionable	movie	house	in	Berlin.
				9	See	Kafka’s	letter	to	Oskar	Pollak	of	January	27,	1904	(Briefe,	pp.

27	f.).	See	also	the	critical	remarks	about	Ernst	Weiss’s	Galley	 in
Diaries	(December	9,	1913),	I,	p.	318.

	 	 10	The	 Trojan	Women	 of	 Euripides,	 a	 German	 adaptation	 by	 Franz
Werfel.	It	was	performed	in	Prague	on	May	24	and	25,	1916.

	 	 11	 Max	 Brod,	 “Die	 drei	 Hauptströmungen	 der	 zeitgenössischen
Literatur”	 [“The	 Three	 Main	 Currents	 of	 Contemporary
Literature”],	Zeit-Echo	(Munich),	II	(1915–16),	No.	13,	196	ff.

	 	 12	 An	 emergency	 school	 founded	 by	 Alfred	 Engel	 in	 Prague	 for
Jewish	refugees	 from	Galicia.	Max	Brod	lectured	there	on	world
literature.	Kafka	attended	 these	 lectures	occasionally;	 see	Diaries
(April	 14,	 1915),	 II,	 pp.	 119	 f.,	 and	 Max	 Brod’s	 account	 in
Jüdische	Rundschau,	XXI,	No.	29	(July	21,	1916),	241	f.

		13	A	small	Zionist	club	whose	members	were	girls	from	Prague.



		14	From	July	3	to	13	Kafka	and	Felice	spent	their	vacation	together
at	 the	 Hotel	 Schloss	 Balmoral	 &	 Osborne	 in	 Marienbad.	 After
Felice’s	 departure	 Kafka	 stayed	 on	 for	 another	 ten	 days.	 His
headaches	and	his	insomnia,	from	which	he	had	suffered	terribly
before	the	trip,	disappeared.	In	his	letter	to	Max	Brod	of	July	12–
14,	 1916,	 Kafka	 reports:	 “After	 the	morning	 in	 Tepl	 [July	 8]	 I
experienced	 such	 lovely	 and	 winged	 days	 as	 I	 did	 not	 believe
possible	 for	 me”	 (Briefe,	 p.	 140).	 See	 also	 note	 92,	 1913,	 and
Diaries	(July	1916),	II,	p.	159,	and	(January	29,	1922),	II,	p.	216.

	 	 15	While	 Kafka	was	 absent—the	 day	 before,	 he	 had	 accompanied
Felice	 to	 Franzensbad	 from	 where	 she	 returned	 to	 Berlin—the
room	he	had	so	far	occupied	was	let	to	other	people.	Instead	he
was	given	Felice’s	former	room.

		16	Erdmuthe	Dorothea	Gräfin	von	Zinzendorf,	geborene	Gräfin	Reuss	zu
Plauen:	 Ihr	 Leben	 als	 Beitrag	 zur	 Geschichte	 des	 Pietismus	 und	 der
Brüdergemeine	 dargestellt	 [Erdmuthe	 Dorothea,	 Countess	 von
Zinzendorf,	 née	 Countess	 Reuss	 zu	 Plauen:	 Her	 Life	 Related	 as	 a
Contribution	 to	 the	 History	 of	 Pietism	 and	 the	 Community	 of
Brethren],	by	Wilhelm	Jannasch,	in	Zeitschrift	für	Brüdergeschichte,
VIII	(Herrnhut,	1914);	the	entire	issue	of	507	pages	is	devoted	to
this	work.

		17	See	Kafka’s	letter	to	Max	Brod	[mid-July	1916]	in	Briefe,	pp.	141
ff.,	 and	 the	article	by	Julius	Elias	on	 the	Rabbi	of	Belz’s	 stay	 in
Marienbad,	Berliner	Tageblatt,	July	20,	1916,	evening	edition.

		18	Kafka	had	asked	Max	Brod	a	few	days	earlier	to	send	a	prospectus
of	 the	 Jüdische	Volksheim	 [Jewish	 People’s	Home]	 in	 Berlin	 to
Felice.	See	Biographical	Note	on	Felice	Bauer	and	Briefe	[mid-July
1916],	p.	141.

		19	Magpie.—Trans.
		20	Paul	Weltsch.
		21	Popular	restaurant	on	the	outskirts	of	Marienbad.
		22	End	of	word	illegible.
	 	23	Kafka	was	 in	 correspondence	with	Kurt	Wolff	Verlag	about	 the
possibility	 of	 his	 taking	 a	 trip	 to	 Leipzig;	 there	 was	 also	 a
discussion	 of	 a	 plan	 for	 a	 volume	 to	 be	 entitled	 Punishments,
which	would	 have	 combined	 the	 three	 stories	 “The	 Judgment,”
“The	 Metamorphosis,”	 and	 “In	 the	 Penal	 Colony”	 (Wolff,



Briefwechsel,	pp.	37	f.).
	 	24	Kafka	writes	 “fletschern”;	 the	word	means	 “to	 chew	one’s	 food

thoroughly,”	 from	 the	 American	 nutritionist	 Horace	 Fletcher
(1849–1919).—Trans.

	 	25	Presumably	 “Blumfeld,	 an	Elderly	Bachelor,”	parts	of	which	he
had	read	to	her	in	Marienbad.

		26	In	the	event	of	his	marriage	to	Felice,	Kafka	considered	living	in
Karlshorst,	a	suburb	of	Berlin.

	 	 27	 Dr.	 Siegfried	 Lehmann	 (1892–1958),	 founder	 of	 the	 Jewish
People’s	Home	and	a	leading	figure	in	Jewish	education	in	Berlin,
later	 in	Palestine–Israel.	His	article	“Idee	der	 jüdischen	Siedlung
und	des	Volksheims”	[“Concept	of	the	Jewish	Settlement	and	the
People’s	Home”]	appeared	in	Jüdische	Rundschau,	XXII,	No.	9,	76
f.,	and	XXII,	No.	10,	83	f.

	 	28	Klabund	 (pseudonym	of	Alfred	Henschke,	1890–1928),	German
writer	 and	 poet.	 Gerson:	 most	 probably	 the	 actress	 Theresa
Gerson,	 who	 played	 the	 leading	 part	 in	 the	 movie	 Ein	 Lied	 für
Dich	[A	Song	for	You],	1933.

	 	 29	 Samuel	 Lublinski	 (1868–1910),	 Die	 Entstehung	 des	 Judentums
(1903).

	 	30	“Wait,	and	soon	/	you	 too	 shall	 rest”	 from	Goethe’s	poem	“Ein
Gleiches.”

	 	 31	 Jüdische	Rundschau,	 XXI,	 No.	 29	 (July	 21,	 1916);	 it	 contained
Max	Brod’s	 article	 “Aus	der	Notschule	 für	galizische	Flüchtlinge
in	 Prag”	 [“The	 Emergency	 School	 for	 (Jewish)	 Refugees	 from
Galicia	in	Prague”]	and	the	quotations	from	letters	mentioned	by
Kafka.

		32	At	this	time	the	Bauer	family	lived	in	Berlin-Charlottenburg;	see
note	 79,	 1913.	 Here,	 however,	 Kafka	 mistakes	 the	 Jewish
People’s	 Home	 for	 the	 Jewish	 Settlement	 Home	 which	 was	 in
Charlottenburg,	as	he	explains	in	his	postcard	of	August	12,	1916.

		33	Friedrich	Feigl;	see	note	77,	1912.
		34	See	note	16,	1916;	the	quoted	passage	is	on	pp.	86	f.
		35	Memoiren	einer	Sozialistin;	see	note	12,	1915
	 	 36	 Theodor	 Fontane	 (1819–98),	 German	 poet	 and	 novelist.	 The

quoted	passages	occur	 in	Fontane’s	 letters	 to	Mathilde	von	Rohr



of	June	17	and	July	1,	1876;	see	Briefe	Theodor	Fontanes,	second
collection,	 ed.	 by	 Otto	 Pniower	 and	 Paul	 Schlenther	 (Berlin,
1910),	 I,	 pp.	 360,	363.	Kafka’s	 alterations	of	 the	 texts	have	not
been	indicated.

	 	37	Felice	had	written	on	occasion	of	 their	 first	meeting	on	August
13,	1912.

	 	38	Kafka	had	 accompanied	Felice	 as	 far	 as	 Franzensbad	when	 she
left	for	home	after	their	stay	in	Marienbad;	see	note	15,	1916.

		39	Dragonerstrasse	22	(today	Max-Beer	Strasse	5)	was	the	address	of
the	Jewish	People’s	Home.

		40	Fontane	to	Mathilde	von	Rohr,	July	1,	1876;	see	note	36,	1916.
		41	Felice’s	and	Max	Brod’s	relatives	Max	and	Sophie	Friedmann;	see

note	4,	1916.
		42	Georg	Müller,	publisher	in	Munich.
		43	See	the	postcards	of	August	19	and	26,	1916.
	 	 44	Otto	Kaus,	Dostojewski:	 Zur	 Kritik	 der	 Persönlichkeit;	 ein	 Versuch

[Dostoevski:	A	Study	of	His	Personality;	An	Essay],	Munich,	1916.
		45	Franz	Blei	(1871–1942),	Austrian	author,	critic,	and	editor.
	 	 46	Wilhelm	 von	 Bode	 (1845–1929),	 director	 of	 royal	museums	 in

Prussia	(1906–20).
	 	 47	On	 September	 30,	 1916,	 Kafka	 sent	 Ernst	 Feigl’s	 poems	 to	 his

publisher	Kurt	Wolff	in	Leipzig;	see	Wolff,	Briefwechsel,	pp.	40	f.
		48	See	postcard	of	August	9,	1916.
		49	Memoiren	einer	Sozialistin.
	 	 50	 Alfred	 Wolfenstein	 (1888–1945),	 German	 expressionist	 poet.

Kafka	 accepted	 the	 invitation;	 on	November	 10	he	 read	 “In	 the
Penal	Colony”	and	poems	by	Max	Brod.	Felice	was	present.

	 	 51	 Presumably	 Nikolai	 N.	 Strakhov’s	 (1828–95)	 introduction	 to
Dostoevski’s	writings	on	literature	in	F.	M.	Dostoevski,	Sämtliche
Werke,	2d	series,	vol.	12	(Munich,	1913).

		52	Friedrich	Wilhelm	Foerster	(1869–1966),	author,	pedagogue,	and
pacifist.	 His	 book	 Jugendlehre:	 Ein	 Buch	 für	 Eltern,	 Lehrer	 und
Geistliche	 [Youth	 Guidance:	 A	 Book	 for	 Parents,	 Teachers,	 and
Clergy]	(Berlin,	1904)	was	used	as	a	text	in	a	pedagogical	seminar
at	 the	 Jewish	 People’s	 Home	 for	 the	 instruction	 of	 the	 helpers,
since	 no	 corresponding	 Jewish	 work	 was	 available.	 See	 Das



Jüdische	 Volksheim	 Berlin:	 Erster	 Bericht,	 Mai/Dezember	 1916
[The	 Berlin	 Jewish	 People’s	 Home,	 First	 Report,	 May/December
1916]	(Berlin,	1917),	p.	15.

		53	“Das	Problem	der	jüdisch-religiösen	Erziehung”	[“The	Problem	of
Jewish	 Religious	 Education”],	 a	 lecture	 given	 by	 Siegfried
Lehmann	to	the	helpers	of	the	Home.

	 	54	Gershom	 (Gerhard)	 Scholem	 (1897–),	 Jewish	 scholar,	 professor
emeritus	at	Hebrew	University,	Jerusalem.

		55	The	first	publication	in	the	yearbook	Arkadia	bore	the	dedication
“To	Fräulein	Felice	B.”	See	letter	of	October	24,	1912.

	 	 56	 The	 prose	 piece	 “A	 Dream,”	 an	 offshoot	 of	 The	 Trial,	 was
apparently	 intended	 to	 be	 published	 together	 with	 Max	 Brod’s
article	 “Unsere	 Literaten	 und	 die	 Gemeinschaft”	 [“Our	 Writers
and	 the	 Community”]	 in	 the	 monthly	 Der	 Jude	 (ed.	 by	 Martin
Buber),	 I,	 No.	 7	 (October	 1916),	 but	 was	 then	 published	 in	 an
anthology,	 coedited	 by	Martin	 Buber,	Das	 jüdische	 Prag	 [Jewish
Prague]	 (Selbstwehr	 Publishers,	 December	 1916).	 It	 was	 also
published	 on	 January	 6,	 1917,	 in	 Prager	 Tagblatt	 (magazine
section),	 and	 again	 in	Almanach	 der	 Neuen	 Jugend	 auf	 das	 Jahr
1917	(Berlin:	Neue	Jugend),	pp.	172	ff.

		57	Peter	Schlemihls	wundersame	Geschichte	by	Adalbert	von	Chamisso
(1781–1838),	German	Romantic	author	of	French	extraction.	Die
Weltliteratur	 was	 a	magazine,	 largely	 printed	 on	 newsprint,	 and
devoted	 to	 the	republication	of	masterpieces	of	world	 literature,
often	with	illustrations.

		58	A	chapter	of	Jugendlehre.
		59	Felice	was	typing	the	manuscript	of	the	Report	cited	in	note	52,
1916.	 The	 twenty-page	 brochure	 bears	 the	 dedication	 “To	 the
sponsors	 of	 our	 work,	 Dr.	Max	 Brod,	 Dr.	Martin	 Buber,	 Gustav
Landauer,	Siegbert	Stern,	Rabbi	Dr.	Warschauer,	in	gratitude.”

	 	 60	 Hermann	 Schaffstein	 in	 Cologne,	 publisher	 of	 inexpensive
juvenile	literature.

	 	 61	 Sholem	 Asch	 (1880–1957,	 novelist	 and	 playwright),	 Kleine
Geschichten	aus	der	Bibel	(Berlin,	1914).	An	English	edition,	In	the
Beginning:	 Stories	 from	 the	 Bible,	 was	 published	 in	 New	 York	 in
1966.

	 	 62	 Alfred	 Lichtwark	 (1852–1914),	Übungen	 in	 der	 Betrachtung	 von



Kunstwerken	nach	Versuchen	mit	einer	Schulklasse	(Dresden,	1898).
	 	 63	 Sholom	 Aleichem	 (pseudonym	 of	 Solomon	 Rabinowitz,	 1859–

1916),	Yiddish	author.
	 	64	The	composer	Adolf	 Schreiber	 (1883–1920).	Max	Brod	wrote	a

book	 about	 him,	 Adolf	 Schreiber:	 Ein	 Musikerschicksal	 [Adolf
Schreiber:	Fate	of	a	Musician]	Berlin,	1921.

		65	The	writer	Alfred	Lemm	(pseudonym	of	Alfred	Lehmann,	1889–
1918),	 brother	 of	 Dr.	 Siegfried	 Lehmann,	 published	 stories,
novels,	and	articles	on	cultural	politics.	Regarding	his	“Idea	of	the
Middle	 Land,”	 which	 Kafka	 apparently	 has	 in	 mind,	 see	 Alfred
Lemm,	 “Wir	 Deutschjuden”	 [“We	 German	 Jews”],	 Die	 Tat,	 VII,
No.	11	(February	1916),	946	ff.

		66	Comedy	(1767)	by	Gotthold	Ephraim	Lessing	(1729–81).
	 	 67	 Yitzhak	 Leib	 Peretz	 (1851–1915),	 Volkstümliche	 Erzählungen

[Popular	Tales],	Berlin,	1913.
		68	Denk	nur	mal	an:	Kafka	is	mocking	Felice’s	Berlinese.—Trans.
	 	 69	 Ernst	 von	 Wildenbruch	 (1845–1909),	 glorified	 the	 House	 of

Hohenzollern	in	his	plays.
		70	Peter	Rosegger	(1843–1918),	popular	Styrian	author.
	 	 71	 Johann	 Peter	 Hebel	 (1760–1826),	 Alemannic	 poet	 and	 prose

writer,	admired	by	Kafka.
	 	 72	 The	 Jewish	 People’s	 Home	 was	 located	 among	 proletarian

tenements	near	the	Alexanderplatz.	See	Klara	Eschelbacher,	“Die
Wohnungsfrage”	 [“The	 Housing	 Problem”],	 Neue	 Jüdische
Monatshefte,	IV,	Nos.	11–12.

	 	 73	 Ben	 Usiel	 (pseudonym	 of	 Samson	 Raphael	 Hirsch,	 1808–88),
Neunzehn	 Briefe	 über	 Judentum	 [Nineteen	 Letters	 about	 Judaism],
Altona,	1836.

	 	74	Hugo	Bergmann	(1883–),	philosopher,	Zionist,	 later	 librarian	at
the	 Hebrew	 National	 Library	 in	 Jerusalem	 and	 professor	 at
Hebrew	University.

		75	Insel	Verlag,	publishers	in	Leipzig,	now	in	Wiesbaden.
	 	 76	 Probably	 a	 reference	 to	 the	 exhibition	 “Mother	 and	 Infant”

mentioned	in	his	postcard	of	September	7,	1916.
		77	See	postcard	of	September	23,	1916.
		78	See	note	56,	1916.



	 	79	Robert	Müller	had	written	 in	his	survey	article	“Phantasie,”	Die
Neue	Rundschau,	II	(1916),	1421	ff.:	“Kafka’s	otherwise	ingenuous
narrative	art,	which	is	fundamentally	German,	laudably	sound,	in
the	vein	of	the	meistersingers,	is	being	deformed	by	hypothetical
patches	on	its	beautiful	material	garb.”	In	his	article	“Our	Writers
and	the	Community,”	Max	Brod	says	about	Kafka:	“Although	the
word	 ‘Jew’	never	occurs	 in	his	works,	 they	are	among	 the	most
typically	Jewish	documents	of	our	time.”

		80	Memoiren	einer	Sozialistin.
		81	The	Zionist	club	mentioned	in	the	postcard	of	May	30,	1916.
		82	Professor	Emil	Milan	(1859–1917),	elocutionist.
	 	 83	 Marie	 von	 Ebner-Eschenbach	 (1830–1916),	 Moravian–Austrian

author	of	novels	and	short	stories.
		84	Gottfried	Keller	(1819–90),	Swiss	poet	and	author	of	novels	and

short	stories.
	 	 85	 Theodor	 Storm	 (1817–88),	 north	 German	 poet	 and	 author	 of

short	stories.
		86	Jens	Peter	Jacobsen;	see	note	123,	1912.
		87	For	Max	Brod	as	a	post	office	official,	see	Brod,	Biography,	p.	81.
		88	See	Diaries	(October	18,	1916),	II,	pp.	166	ff.
		89	The	novelist	Auguste	Hauschner	(1852–1924).
		90	Kafka	mentions	this	verdict	also	in	his	 letter	to	Max	Brod	(mid-

July	1916)	from	Marienbad	(Briefe,	p.	140).
	 	 91	 The	 songbook	 of	 the	 Zionist	 Youth	 Organization	 Blau-Weiss;

Hebrew:	Tehelet-Lavan.
		92	Friedrich	Fröbel	(1782–1852),	German	educator	and	originator	of

the	kindergarten.
	 	 93	 Arnold	 Zweig	 (1887–1968),	 Ritualmord	 in	 Ungarn:	 Jüdische

Tragödie	 in	 fünf	 Aufzügen	 [Ritual	 Murder	 in	 Hungary:	 A	 Jewish
Tragedy	in	Five	Acts],	Berlin,	1914.

		94	See	Appendix.
	 	95	Kafka’s	 suspicion	was	 unfounded.	 “The	 Judgment”	 appeared	 at

the	end	of	October	as	Volume	34	in	Kurt	Wolff’s	series	Der	jüngste
Tag.

		96	Schaffstein’s	blue	series	was	devoted	to	fiction,	the	green	series	to



nonfiction	 (travel,	 exploration);	 of	 the	 latter,	 Kafka	 had	 several
volumes	in	his	library	and	mentioned	two	more	titles	in	his	diary;
Diaries	 (December	 15,	 1913),	 I,	 p.	 323,	 and	 (September	 16,
1915),	II,	p.	130.

	 	 97	 Oskar	 Weber,	 Der	 Zuckerbaron:	 Schicksale	 eines	 ehemaligen
deutschen	Offiziers	in	Südamerika	[The	Sugar	Baron:	Experiences	of	a
Former	 German	 Officer	 in	 South	 America],	 with	 illustrations	 by
Max	 Bürger.	 Schaffstein’s	 Little	 Green	 Books,	 No.	 54	 (Cologne,
1914).

		98	Dr.	Heinrich	Hoffmann	(1809–94),	physician,	author	of	juveniles
and	of	the	popular	Struwelpeter.

		99	The	paper	is	not	preserved,	unless	it	is	the	appeal	enclosed	with
the	letter	of	October	30,	1916.

100	These	postcards	have	not	been	preserved.
101	Reference	to	their	stay	in	Munich,	November	10–12,	1916.
102	Reviews	of	Kafka’s	reading	at	the	Kunst-Salon	Goltz	in	Munich	on
November	 10,	 1916,	 in	 the	 München-Augsburger	 Abendzeitung,
noon	edition,	November	13,	1916,	p.	2.	The	other	review	Kafka
had	seen	was	in	the	Münchener	Neueste	Nachrichten,	November	11,
1916,	 p.	 3.	 A	 third	 review	 appeared	 in	 the	Münchener	 Zeitung,
November	12,	1916,	p.	2.

103	Rilke	and	Kafka	probably	never	met	personally.	Kafka	may	have
heard	of	Rilke’s	opinion	about	his	works	 through	Eugen	Mondt.
Since	 “In	 the	 Penal	Colony”	was	 not	 printed	 at	 the	 time,	Rilke,
who	then	lived	in	Munich,	must	have	seen	the	manuscript	which
had	 arrived	 in	 Munich	 on	 September	 30	 and	 discussed	 it	 with
Eugen	 Mondt.	 See	 Eugen	 Mondt,	 “München–Dachau,	 ein
literarisches	 Erinnerungsbüchlein”	 [“Munich–Dachau:	 A	 Brief
Literary	Memoir”]	(typescript	in	the	Municipal	Library,	Munich),
pp.	 42	 f.	 Rilke	 followed	 Kafka’s	 work	 with	 great	 interest;	 in	 a
letter	to	Kurt	Wolff	of	February	17,	1922,	he	says,	“Please	put	me
down	especially	for	anything	that	appears	by	Franz	Kafka.	I	am,	I
might	 assure	 you,	 not	 his	 worst	 reader”	 (Wolff,	Briefwechsel,	 p.
152).

104	 Ottla	 had	 settled	 in	 one	 of	 the	 small	 old	 houses	 on
Alchimistengässchen	(No.	22),	but	let	her	brother,	who	hoped	to
find	peace	and	quiet	 for	his	work,	 stay	 there.	He	did	not	 spend
the	nights	there	but	returned	home,	often	quite	late,	to	his	room



on	Langegasse,	later	in	the	Palais	Schönborn.
105	 The	 feast	 day	 of	 St.	 Nicholas,	 December	 6,	 when	 children	 are

rewarded	with	presents	for	good	behavior.
106	Emil	Milan	gave	a	reading	on	December	7	in	Choralion	Hall;	on

the	 same	 day,	 the	 poet	 Rudolf	 Borchardt	 (1877–1945)	 gave	 a
lecture	on	“Der	Krieg	und	die	deutsche	Entscheidung”	[“The	War
and	 the	 Decision	 for	 Germany”]	 in	 the	 large	 hall	 of	 the	 Berlin
Philharmonic;	on	December	6,	Rudolf	Blümner	gave	a	reading	of
Hermann	Essig’s	 (1878–1918)	novella	Lucie	at	 the	art	exhibition
“Der	Sturm.”

107	Die	alte	Schloss-Stiege	(Staré	zámecké	schody)	has	98	steps.
108	Gottfried	Kölwel	(1889–1958),	poet,	playwright,	and	novelist;	see

also	note	50,	1916.
109	 The	 postcard	 mentioning	 the	 “impudence”	 has	 not	 been

preserved.
110	 Blum=Blume,	 flower;	 stein=stone;	 in	 idiomatic	 German	 the

compound	would	be	Blumenstein,	hence	the	two	sacrificed	letters
en.

1917
	 	 	 	1	The	copy	of	 this	 letter—or	draft	of	a	 letter—was	 found	among

Kafka’s	papers	and	was	first	published	by	Max	Brod	in	Biography,
pp.	157	ff.

				2	The	room	in	“At	the	Sign	of	the	Golden	Pike”;	see	note	5,	1915.
				3	The	Schönborn	Palace	on	the	Malá	Strana,	Marktgasse	(Trěžiště)

365/15,	 where	 Kafka	 stayed	 from	 early	 March	 to	 late	 August
1917.

				4	Not	preserved.
				5	Shortly	before	the	date	of	Kafka’s	letter,	Felice	had	visited	him	in

Zürau	on	September	20–21;	see	Diaries	(September	21,	1917),	II,
pp.	184	f.

				6	See	Diaries	(September–October	1917),	II,	pp.	187	f.,	and	letter	to
Max	Brod	from	the	beginning	of	October	1917	(Briefe,	p.	178).

				7	See	letter	to	Max	Brod	of	October	12,	1917	(Briefe,	pp.	181	ff.).



Appendix

An	 announcement	 from	 the	 Prager	 Tagblatt	 of	 September	 25,
1912,	enclosed	with	Kafka’s	letter	of	November	24,	1912.

THE	BEATIFICATION	OF	THE	UGANDAN	MARTYRS

A	 decree	 issued	 on	 August	 13	 by	 the	 Congregation	 of	 Rites
announces	the	opening	of	proceedings	for	the	beatification	of	the	so-
called	“Ugandan	Martyrs”—22	Christian	Negro	youths	who,	26	years
ago,	were	the	first	to	be	martyred	for	the	faith	and	suffered	death	at
the	 stake.	 It	 was	 reported	 from	 the	 central	 office	 of	 the	 St.	 Peter
Claver	Sodality	in	Rome	that	the	cardinals	who	had	this	matter	under
consideration	had	been	moved	to	tears	by	the	heroism	of	these	young
martyrs.	The	news	of	the	opening	of	proceedings	for	the	beatification
was	 received	 by	 all	Negroes,	 and	 in	 particular	 by	 those	 from	North
Victoria	Nyanza,	the	home	of	the	martyrs,	with	great	rejoicing	which
they	expressed	by	dancing	and	much	leaping	about.

An	 announcement	 from	 the	 Prager	 Tagblatt	 of	 June	 1,	 1913,
enclosed	with	Kafka’s	letter	of	June	1,	1913.

AN	EAST	EUROPEAN	JEWISH	ACTOR

On	June	2	(at	8	P.M.	at	the	Hotel	Bristol)	the	people	of	Prague	will
be	given	the	opportunity	to	meet	a	distinguished	performer	of	an	art
usually	 banished	 to	 inaccessible	 places,	 and	 rarely	 seen	 in	 Central
Europe.	Many	will	remember	the	curious	evenings	we	witnessed	 last
year	when	a	Yiddish	theater	set	up	its	primitive	stage	in	a	small	hall
in	 the	Altstadt.	One	was	caught	up	 in	a	 strange	world	where	people
lived	a	life	of	childlike	imagination,	enthusiasts	who	needed	no	more
than	 the	 boards	 beneath	 their	 feet	 and	 a	 few	 colored	 rags	 on	 their
bodies,	and	with	an	old	backdrop,	perhaps	an	armchair	for	throne,	to
bring	 to	 life	 dramatic	 events.	 The	 general	 opinion	was	 that	 Yitzhak
Löwy	was	the	most	outstanding	performer	among	the	actors	who	put



themselves	at	the	disposal	of	Yiddish	playwrights.	One	still	remembers
the	 performance	 he	 gave	 last	 year,	 his	 portrayal	 of	 callous	 rogues,
contrite	 scoundrels,	 his	 roles	 as	 servants	 played	 like	 crafty	 oriental
Sancho	 Panzas,	 his	 twitching	 fingers,	 his	 furrowed	 face	 etched	with
his	enchanting	smile,	his	gait,	the	versatility	of	his	beautiful	masculine
voice.	 On	 June	 2	 we	 shall	 be	 given	 the	 opportunity	 of	 meeting	 Y.
Löwy	for	the	second	time;	he	will	recite,	sing,	and	act,	and	may	allow
us	another	glimpse	of	his	unfamiliar,	unappreciated	artistry.

The	text	of	an	appeal	written	by	Kafka,	enclosed	with	his	letter	of
October	 30,	 1916:	 A	 German	 society	 for	 the	 establishment	 and
support	of	a	military	and	civilian	hospital	in	Prague	for	the	treatment
of	nervous	diseases	in	German	Bohemia.

COMPATRIOTS!
This	great	war	which	encompasses	the	sum	total	of	human	misery	is

also	a	war	on	the	nervous	system,	more	a	war	on	the	nervous	system
than	any	previous	war.	All	 too	many	people	 succumb	 to	 this	war	of
nerves.	 Just	 as	 the	 intensive	 industrialization	 of	 the	 past	 decades	 of
peace	 had	 attacked,	 affected,	 and	 caused	 disorders	 of	 the	 nervous
systems	 of	 those	 engaged	 in	 industry	more	 than	 ever	 before,	 so	 the
enormously	 increased	mechanization	of	present-day	warfare	presents
the	 gravest	 dangers	 and	 disorders	 to	 the	 nervous	 system	 of	 fighting
men.	 In	 ways,	 moreover,	 of	 which	 even	 the	 expert	 can	 have	 no
adequate	idea.	According	to	reliable	statistics	in	Bohemia,	there	were
already	 in	 June	 1916	 more	 than	 4000	 war-disabled	 suffering	 from
nervous	 illnesses	 in	 German	 Bohemia	 alone.	 And	 what	 lies	 ahead?
How	 many	 people	 suffering	 from	 nervous	 ailments	 are	 still	 in
hospitals	 outside	 Bohemia?	 How	many	 prisoners	 of	 war	 will	 return
suffering	from	nervous	disorders?	Incalculable	misery	awaits	help.	He
who	twitches	and	jumps	with	nerves	in	the	streets	of	our	cities	is	but	a
comparatively	 harmless	 representative	 of	 the	 immense	 number	 of
sufferers.
What	is	to	be	done?	We	have	the	choice:	We	can	allow	things	to	go

on	as	 they	are.	We	can	watch	 those	who	return	 from	 the	 front	with
nervous	disorders	pouring	into	military	hospitals	where	only	a	limited
number	 find	 their	 way	 to	 the	 few	 departments	 specializing	 in	 the
treatment	of	nervous	diseases,	while	 the	rest	get	no	 further	 than	the
general	military	wards.	Undoubtedly	 the	 specialized	departments	 do
arrive	 at	 improvements	 and	 cures,	 and	 are	 as	 successful	 as	 their



inadequate	means	 permit.	 But	 how	 few	 are	 the	 fortunate	 ones	who
receive	 this	 treatment!	And	 the	majority	with	 nervous	 illnesses	who
are	in	general	hospitals,	what	happens	to	them?	With	the	best	will	in
the	 world,	 and	 the	 greatest	 medical	 expertise,	 there	 is	 no	 help	 for
them	today.	For	those	who	defended	their	country	with	their	lives,	the
country	for	which	they	risked	their	own	and	their	families’	future	can
provide	 no	 help;	 for	 help	 can	 be	 provided	 only	 in	 a	well-equipped,
modern	 hospital.	 But	 since	 there	 is	 no	 such	 place,	 the	 fate	 of	 these
unfortunate	sufferers	is	sealed.	They	are	sent	home	uncured,	to	add	to
the	 numbers	 of	 chronic	 peacetime	 neurasthenics,	 victims	 of
permanent	 and	 constantly	 increasing	 suffering,	 a	 torment	 to	 their
families,	 a	 loss	 to	 the	 German	 Bohemian	 population,	 candidates	 for
insane	asylums.	Is	this	the	reward	German	Bohemia	offers	its	sons?
But	 there	 is	another	possibility!	German	Bohemia,	 that	 is,	 the	entire

German-speaking	 population,	 can	 by	 its	 own	 efforts	 build	 a	 large
national	hospital	for	the	treatment	of	nervous	diseases,	plus	adequate
contributions	of	course	from	the	government	with	its	vital	interest	in
institutions	 of	 this	 kind	 in	 times	 of	 peace	 and	 war,	 from	 the	 social
insurance	 institutes,	 private	 insurance	 companies,	 the	 railroad
management,	 the	 landowners,	 industry,	 and	 anyone	 with	 a	 warm
heart	who	wishes	to	contribute	however	small	a	donation.	A	national
hospital	of	this	kind,	well	furnished	and	equipped	like	the	exemplary
ones	 in	 Germany,	 could	 turn	 out	 to	 be	 a	 rich	 blessing	 for	 German
Bohemia.	Now,	and	for	as	long	as	may	be	necessary	after	the	war,	the
hospital	could	be	reserved	for	war	casualties	from	German	Bohemia;
but	 thereafter	 it	 should	 be	 devoted	 to	 its	 permanent	 purpose—the
housing	and	treatment	of	 impecunious	German	Bohemian	compatriots
suffering	from	nervous	diseases.	With	science	and	a	love	of	humanity
for	weapons,	we	have	an	opportunity	to	master,	if	not	entirely	at	least
to	a	great	extent,	one	of	the	horrors	of	war	as	of	peace.
We	 can	 choose	 between	 these	 alternatives,	 or	 rather,	 there	 is	 no

choice.	 It	 would	 be	 our	 undoubted	 human,	 patriotic,	 and	 national
duty	 to	 take	 some	 determined	 action	 in	 this	 matter,	 even	 if	 the
probable	 success	 of	 our	 intervention	 were	 not	 as	 great	 and	 as
promising	 as	 it	 clearly	 is.	 Since	 this	 is	 so,	 speed	 is	 all	 the	 more
necessary.
A	start	has	been	made.	At	a	meeting	on	October	14	in	the	German

House	 in	 Prague,	 representatives	 from	 all	 parties,	 classes,	 and
authorities	 of	 German	 Bohemia	 were	 present.	 With	 complete
unanimity	and	a	rare	spirit	of	sacrifice,	the	need	for	active	support	for



A	 German	 Society	 for	 the	 Establishment	 and	 Support	 of	 a	 National
Hospital	for	the	Treatment	of	Nervous	Diseases	in	German	Bohemia	with
its	 headquarters	 in	 Prague	 was	 recognized	 and	 decided	 upon.	 This
Society	 is	 intended	 to	 form	 part	 of	 the	 national	 German	 Bohemian
wartime	relief	organization,	and	for	the	time	being	will	be	represented
by	a	Preparatory	Committee	formed	and	elected	at	this	meeting.
The	 first	 task	 is	 to	 raise	 funds.	With	 this	 in	mind	we	humbly	 invite

you	 to	 participate	 to	 the	 best	 of	 your	 ability,	 and	 to	 persuade	 your
friends	to	participate	in	this	great	German	Bohemian	undertaking,	the
like	of	which	has	never	before	been	seen	in	Austria.
According	 to	 the	 statutes,	 contributions	 can	 be	 made	 in	 the

following	ways:

1.	By	voluntary	donations.
2.	By	becoming	a	Founder	Member	of	the	Society	with	a	donation

of	 5000	 kronen	 or	 more;	 for	 every	 contribution	 of	 5000	 kronen	 a
Founder	 Member	 will	 have	 the	 right	 to	 nominate	 one	 patient	 for
admission	to	the	hospital.
3.	 By	 becoming	 a	 Sponsor	 of	 the	 Society	 with	 a	 one-time

contribution	of	1000	kronen	or	more.	The	names	of	Founder	Members
and	Sponsors	will	be	recorded	on	a	memorial	tablet	to	be	erected	in
the	hospital	to	perpetuate	their	memory.
4.	 By	 joining	 the	 Society	 as	 a	 Regular	 Member	 with	 an	 annual

minimum	contribution	of	5	kronen.	A	single	donation	of	not	less	than
200	kronen	can	be	substituted	for	this	annual	contribution.

We	confidently	hope	that	our	request,	which	is	also	the	request	of
our	beloved	country,	will	not	remain	unanswered.
Contributions	 can	 be	 sent	 by	 means	 of	 the	 enclosed	 remittance

form.	 For	 the	 time	 being,	 correspondence	 should	 be	 addressed	 to:
German	Society	 for	 the	Establishment	and	Support	of	a	Military	and
Civilian	 Hospital	 in	 German	 Bohemia,	 Workers’	 Accident	 Insurance
Institute,	Prague,	Pořič	7.
Prague,	November	1916

This	appeal	was	signed	by	well	over	one	hundred	prominent	people
from	 German	 Bohemia,	 including	 Robert	 Marschner,	 Otto	 Přibram,
and	Franz	Kafka	himself.



Chronology

	 1912
First	encounter	with	Felice	Bauer	at	the	house	of

AUGUST	13
Max	Brod	in	Prague.

SEPTEMBER	20 First	letter	to	Felice.
SEPTEMBER	22–23 “The	Judgment”	(short	story)	written	overnight.

Kafka’s	letters	to	Sophie	Friedmann:	since	there
OCTOBER	14	&	18 is	no	answer	from	Felice,	he	asks	her	relative	to

intervene.
OCTOBER	23 Felice’s	reply	after	the	“month’s	waiting-time.”
NOVEMBER	15	&	22 Max	Brod	writes	to	Felice	about	Kafka.

Inception	of	The	Metamorphosis;	on	November
NOVEMBER	17–DECEMBER	7 24	a	reading	of	parts	of	the	still	unfinished	story

at	Oskar	Baum’s.
Public	reading	of	“The	Judgment”	during

DECEMBER	4 authors’	evening	of	the	Prague	Herder
Association.

MID-DECEMBER Meditation	published	by	Rowohlt.

	 1913
MARCH	1 Reading	of	The	Metamorphosis	at	Max	Brod’s.

First	meeting	with	Felice	in	Berlin.	On	March



MARCH	23–24 24,	on	the	return	journey	to	Prague,	meets	Kurt
Wolff	in	Leipzig.
Start	of	gardening	work	in	Troja,	near	Prague.
April	7–17	Felice	acts	as	her	company’s

APRIL	7
representative	at	an	exhibition	in	Frankfurt	am
Main.

MAY	11–12 Second	visit	to	Berlin,	during	Whitsun	holidays.
The	Stoker	is	published	as	the	third	volume	in

MAY
Kurt	Wolff’s	series	Der	jüngste	Tag.
“The	Judgment”	published	in	the	yearbook

EARLY	JUNE
Arkadia.
Letter	in	which	Kafka	asks	Felice	for	her	hand

JUNE	10–16
for	the	first	time.
First	meeting	in	Prague	with	Ernst	Weiss,	doctor

JUNE	28
and	writer.
Felice	spends	her	summer	vacation	(August	1–

AUGUST
17)	in	Westerland	on	the	island	of	Sylt.
Travels	to	Vienna	with	Director	Marschner	for
the	International	Congress	for	First	Aid	and
Accident	Prevention;	stays	in	Vienna	until

SEPTEMBER	6
September	13;	visits	Eleventh	Zionist	Congress;
meets	Albert	Ehrenstein,	Lise	Weltsch,	Felix
Stössinger,	and	Ernst	Weiss.
Travels	from	Vienna	to	Trieste,	thence	to	Venice

SEPTEMBER	14
by	steamer.
Stays	in	Venice;	travels	via	Verona	and
Desenzano	to	Riva	on	Lake	Garda;	from

SEPTEMBER	15–16 September	22	in	Dr.	von	Hartungen’s



sanatorium;	meets	G.W.,	“the	Swiss	girl.”

Resumes	correspondence	with	Felice,	suspended
OCTOBER	29

since	September	20.
First	encounter	with	Grete	Bloch	in	Prague;

NOVEMBER	1 begins	correspondence	with	her	on	November
10.

NOVEMBER	8–9 Meets	Felice	briefly	in	Berlin;	visits	Ernst	Weiss.
Ernst	Weiss	visits	Felice	in	her	office,	and	on

MID-DECEMBER Kafka’s	behalf	asks	for	an	explanation	for	long
silence.

END	DECEMBER Meets	Ernst	Weiss	in	Prague.

	 1914
Kafka	renews	his	request	for	Felice’s	hand	by

EARLY	JANUARY
letter;	she	answers	evasively.
Meets	Felice	in	Berlin;	her	arguments	against

FEBRUARY	28–MARCH	1
their	marriage.
Kafka	decides	to	leave	Prague	unless	Felice	is

END	MARCH
willing	to	marry	him.
Meets	Felice	in	Berlin;	unofficial	engagement;

APRIL	12–13	(EASTER)
Felice	willing	to	marry	in	September.
Felice	arrives	in	Prague;	she	and	Kafka	start

MAY	1 searching	for	an	apartment.	(Mid-May	Kafka
rents	a	3-room	apartment	at	Langegasse	923/5.)
Kafka’s	mother	and	his	sister	Ottla	arrive	in

MAY	26
Berlin	as	guests	of	the	Bauer	family.
Accompanied	by	his	father,	travels	to	Berlin	to



MAY	30 celebrate	the	official	engagement.	June	1
(Whitmonday)	reception	at	the	Bauers’.
Ernst	Weiss	arrives	in	Prague	and	returns	to

MID-JUNE
Berlin	on	June	19.
Decision	to	go	to	Berlin	for	weekend	of	July	11–

JULY	2
12	for	discussion.
Discussion	at	Hotel	Askanische	Hof	in	the

JULY	12 presence	of	Grete	Bloch	and	Erna	Bauer;
engagement	broken	off.
Travels	from	Berlin	to	the	Baltic;	two	weeks’
vacation,	first	in	Travemünde,	then	with	Ernst

JULY	13 Weiss	and	Rahel	Sansara	in	the	Danish	seaside
resort	Marielyst.	On	July	26	returns	to	Prague
via	Berlin	(meets	Erna	Bauer).

EARLY	AUGUST Begins	to	work	on	The	Trial.
Vacation	devoted	entirely	to	writing;
continuation	of	work	on	The	Trial	and	“The	Man

OCTOBER	5–19
Who	Disappeared”;	writes	“In	the	Penal
Colony.”

	 1915
Meets	Felice	in	Bodenbach.	(First	meeting	since
breaking	off	the	engagement.)	Among	other

JANUARY	23–24
writings	Kafka	reads	to	her	the	legend	of	the
doorkeeper	(“Before	the	Law,”	from	The	Trial).
Vacates	room	in	Bilekgasse	(Bílkova	ulice)

MARCH 868/10,	moves	to	room	in	Langegasse	(Dlouhá
trida)	705/18,	“At	the	Sign	of	the	Golden	Pike.”



Travels	with	his	sister	Elli	to	see	her	husband,	a
END	APRIL soldier	stationed	in	the	Carpathian	mountains	in

Hungary.
With	Felice	and	Grete	Bloch	for	the	Whitsun

MAY	23–24
holiday	in	Bohemian	Switzerland.

JUNE With	Felice	in	Karlsbad.
Stays	in	a	sanatorium	in	Rumburg	(northern

JULY	20–31
Bohemia).
The	Metamorphosis	published	in	Die	weissen

OCTOBER
Blätter,	X	(October).
The	Metamorphosis	published	as	a	double-issue

NOVEMBER volume	(22–23)	in	Kurt	Wolff’s	series	Der	jüngste
Tag.
“Before	the	Law”	published	in	the	yearbook

DECEMBER Vom	jüngsten	Tag:	Ein	Almanach	neuer	Dichtung
(Leipzig,	1916).

	 1916
APRIL	9 In	Karlsbad	with	Ottla.

Request	for	leave	of	absence	from	the	Workers’
Accident	Insurance	Institute	in	the	event	of	the
war	ending	in	the	autumn;	alternatively	a

MAY	9
request	for	the	lifting	of	the	exemption	from
military	service	in	force	for	the	employees	of	the
Institute.

MAY	13–15 On	business	to	Karlsbad	and	Marienbad.
In	Marienbad	with	Felice;	Kafka	reads	to	her



“Blumfeld,	an	Elderly	Bachelor.”	On	the	13th
JULY	3–13 with	Felice	in	Franzensbad	to	meet	Kafka’s

mother	and	his	sister	Valli.	From	there	Felice
returns	to	Berlin;	Kafka	spends	ten	more	days	in
Marienbad.
Kafka	encourages	Felice	to	participate	in	the

SEPTEMBER
work	of	the	Jewish	People’s	Home	in	Berlin.
“The	Judgment”	is	published	in	volume	34	of

OCTOBER
Kurt	Wolff’s	series	Der	jüngste	Tag.
In	Munich	with	Felice.	On	November	10,	Kafka
reads	his	story	“In	the	Penal	Colony”	(“Evenings

NOVEMBER	10–12 for	New	Writing”	in	the	Gallery	Goltz);	meets
Gottfried	Kölwel,	Max	Pulver,	and	Eugen
Mondt.
From	early	December,	Kafka	spends	several
hours	a	day	writing	in	Ottla’s	little	house	at

DECEMBER Alchimistengässchen	(Zlatá	ulička)	22.	“A
Dream”	published	in	the	anthology	Das	jüdische
Prag.

	 1917
Apartment	in	the	Schönborn	Palace,	Marktgasse

EARLY	MARCH
(Trěžiště)	365/15.
Second	engagement.	Felice	in	Prague.	Travel
together	via	Budapest	to	Felice’s	sister	in	Arad.

EARLY	JULY
Kafka	returns	alone	via	Vienna;	visits	Rudolf
Fuchs.

AUGUST	9–10 Hemorrhage.



SEPTEMBER	1 Vacates	apartment	in	Schönborn	Palace.
With	Max	Brod	to	Professor	Pick:	tuberculosis

SEPTEMBER	1
diagnosed.
Moves	to	Ottla’s	in	Zürau,	in	northwest

SEPTEMBER	12
Bohemia.

SEPTEMBER	20–21 Felice	in	Zürau.
“Jackals	and	Arabs”	published	in	the	October

OCTOBER–NOVEMBER issue	of	the	monthly	Der	Jude;	“A	Report	to	an
Academy”	in	the	November	issue.
Felice	in	Prague;	second	and	final	breaking-off

DECEMBER	25–27
of	engagement.



THE	SCHOCKEN	KAFKA	LIBRARY

AMERIKA
a	new	translation	by	Mark	Harman,based	on	the	restored	text

Kafka’s	first	and	funniest	novel	tells	the	story	of	the	young	immigrant
Karl	 Rossmann	 who,	 “packed	 off	 to	 America”	 by	 his	 parents,	 finds
himself	 caught	 up	 in	 a	 whirlwind	 of	 dizzying	 reversals,	 strange
escapades,	and	picaresque	adventures.

“Almost	 ninety	 years	 after	 his	 death,	 Kafka	 continues	 to	 defy
simplifications,	to	force	us	to	consider	him	anew.	That’s	the	effect	of
Mark	Harman’s	new	translation.”	—Los	Angeles	Times

THE	CASTLE
a	new	translation	by	Mark	Harman,based	on	the	restored	text

This	haunting	tale	of	a	man	known	only	as	K.	and	his	endless	struggle
against	an	inscrutable	authority	to	gain	admittance	to	a	castle	is	often
cited	as	Kafka’s	most	autobiographical	work.

“Will	be	the	translation	of	preference	for	some	time	to	come.”	—J.	M.
Coetzee,	The	New	York	Review	of	Books

THE	COMPLETE	STORIES
edited	by	Nahum	N.	Glatzer,	with	a	foreword	by	John	Updike

All	of	Kafka’s	stories	are	collected	here	in	one	comprehensive	volume;
with	 the	 exception	 of	 the	 three	 novels,	 the	 whole	 of	 his	 narrative
work	is	included.

“The	Complete	 Stories	 is	 an	 encyclopedia	 of	 our	 insecurities	 and	 our
brave	attempts	to	oppose	them.”	—Anatole	Broyard

DIARIES,	1910–1923
edited	by	Max	Brod

For	the	first	time	in	this	country,	the	complete	diaries	of	Franz	Kafka
are	available	in	one	volume.	Covering	the	period	from	1910	to	1923,



the	year	before	Kafka’s	death,	they	reveal	the	essential	Kafka	behind
the	enigmatic	artist.

“It	 is	 likely	 that	 these	 journals	will	 be	 regarded	 as	 one	 of	 [Kafka’s]
major	 literary	works;	 in	 these	pages,	he	reveals	what	he	customarily
hid	from	the	world.”	—The	New	Yorker

LETTERS	TO	FRIENDS,	FAMILY,	AND	EDITORS
translated	by	Richard	and	Clara	Winston

“These	 letters	are	 like	messages	 from	the	underground	…	presenting
aspects	 of	 Kafka	 that	 would	 have	 died	 with	 his	 friends.	 We	 meet
alternately	 Kafka	 the	 artist,	 friend,	 son,	 father	 figure,	 marriage
counselor,	 literary	 critic,	 insurance	 official…	 .	A	 full	 portrait,	 and	 a
significant	contribution	to	Kafka	scholarship.”	—Smithsonian	Magazine

LETTERS	TO	MILENA
translated	and	with	an	introduction	by	Philip	Boehm

In	 no	 other	 work	 does	 Kafka	 reveal	 himself	 as	 in	 this	 collection	 of
letters	to	Milena	Jesenská,	his	twenty-three-year-old	Czech	translator.
A	 business	 correspondence	 that	 developed	 into	 a	 passionate	 but
doomed	epistolary	love	affair	with	a	woman	he	described	as	“a	living
fire,	such	as	I	have	never	seen,”	it	shows	us	a	Kafka	not	seen	in	any	of
his	other	writings.

“Kafka’s	 voice	 here	 is	 more	 personal,	 more	 pure,	 and	 more	 painful
than	in	his	fiction:	a	testimony	to	human	existence,	and	to	our	eternal
wait	for	the	impossible.”	—Jan	Kott

THE	METAMORPHOSIS	AND	OTHER	STORIES
translated	by	Willa	and	Edwin	Muir

This	 powerful	 collection	 brings	 together	 all	 the	 stories	 Franz	 Kafka
published	 during	 his	 lifetime,	 including	 “The	 Judgment,”	 “The
Metamorphosis,”	“In	 the	Penal	Colony,”	“A	Country	Doctor,”	and	“A
Hunger	Artist.”

“Kafka’s	 survey	 of	 the	 insectile	 situation	 of	 young	 Jews	 in	 inner
Bohemia	 can	 hardly	 be	 improved	 upon.	 There	 is	 a	 sense	 in	 which
Kafka’s	 Jewish	 question	 has	 become	 everybody’s	 question,	 Jewish



alienation	the	template	for	all	our	doubts.	These	days	we	all	find	our
anterior	legs	flailing	before	us.	We’re	all	insects,	all	Ungeziefer,	now.”
—Zadie	Smith

THE	SONS
translations	revised	and	updated	by	Arthur	Wensinger,	with	an

introduction	by	Mark	Anderson
Franz	 Kafka’s	 three	 classic	 stories	 of	 filial	 revolt—”The
Metamorphosis,”	 “The	 Judgment,”	 and	 “The	 Stoker”—grouped
together	with	his	own	poignant	“Letter	to	His	Father,”	take	on	fresh,
compelling	meaning.

“Kafka	is	 the	author	who	comes	nearest	 to	bearing	the	same	kind	of
relationship	 to	 our	 age	 as	 Dante,	 Shakespeare,	 and	 Goethe	 bore	 to
theirs.”	—W.	H.	Auden

THE	TRIAL
a	new	translation	by	Breon	Mitchell,	based	on	the	restored	text

The	 terrifying	 story	 of	 Joseph	 K.,	 his	 arrest	 and	 trial,	 is	 one	 of	 the
greatest	novels	of	the	twentieth	century.

“Mitchell’s	translation	is	an	accomplishment	of	the	highest	order—one
that	 will	 honor	 Kafka	 far	 into	 the	 twenty-first	 century.’’	 —Walter
Abish,	author	of	How	German	Is	It

All	of	these	titles	are	available	in	eBook	format.
Please	visit	www.schocken.com	for	more	information	on	these	and

other	Schocken	Books	titles.